this has never happened before today we
have three experts in their field with
three different opinions debating the
subject of porn this is the first time
I've gone on pornh Hub at
work in one corner we have Dr Reena
Malik the sex scientist helping millions
of couples enhance their sex lives in
the other Corner we have Dr Kate the
psychiatrist specializing in helping
people with addictions to pornography
and more who is up against Erica lust
who runs a large pornographic production
company no one can sit on the fence here
is porn a benefit to people and Society
definitely and especially for people who
haven't really had that right to
pleasure to understand their sexuality
but I think what we're clearly seeing is
a trend of it being damaging and let me
just share with you all what I'm afraid
of it is doing way more to the brain
than we ever realized so the first thing
that we know is that bye there's data to
suggest that couples that use
pornography together have better sexual
en counters and women who use
pornography have better sexual
satisfaction rates and remember that
women's sexuality has been so much about
pleasing others and you see it with the
orgasm Gap from a devil's advocate would
say that there is significant number of
women interested in looking a certain
way that they're often seeing on
pornography that's harmful I'm a bit
suspicious about this because honestly
that statement is from 10 years ago but
there's also unrealistic expectations
about performance that creat shame and
small penis anxiety is a real thing and
it's often from watching pornography the
real problem is we are not giving sex
education to our young people they are
lost but it doesn't have to be an
addiction it's the way that you relate
to it it is something that people can
control and parents can learn how to
have these conversations with their kids
there are a couple of really nice
techniques that you can use the first is
that
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guests that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
let's start with
introductions Dr Reena who are you and
what you do so I'm a urologist which is
essentially a medical and surgical
doctor of the genetry urinary tract but
I see myself more as a digital opinion
leader in the space of sexual health and
neurologic health so someone who can
talk to and speak about complex Concepts
in addition to Sexual Health in a way
that people can understand can you give
me sort of a a view of the VAR iety of
things that you've worked on in your
career the types of patients you've
worked with and the subject matter
broadly that you've addressed and are
confronted with in your line of work
absolutely so as a urologist we're
trained to treat anything in those areas
of the genitor urinary tract so that can
be kidney cancer prostate cancer bladder
cancer Sexual Health erectile
dysfunction female sexual dysfunction
kidney stones children's issues but then
when uh I did a fellowship in what's
called female pelvic medicine and
reconstructive surgery or Euro
Gynecology so I initially trained in
dealing with voiding dysfunction um and
problems with bladder leakage overactive
bladder prolapse those sorts of things
and subsequently expanding my practice
into sexual medicine so I take care of
patients with issues with erectile
dysfunction arousal or disorders
ejaculatory dysfunction um libido issues
uh lubrication issues a whole bunch of
different areas of issues that people
deal with when it comes to sexual health
Dr K same question to you sure so I'm a
psychiatrist by training but I had kind
of a roundabout way to get there so uh I
failed out of college due to video game
addiction and then went to India to find
myself studied uh to become a monk for
about seven years and then wound up
going to medical school becoming a
psychiatrist and now the majority of the
work that I do is actually like focused
on the internet so what I noticed when I
was training was that if you look at
like academic Psychiatry or Psychiatry
we focus on things like depression or
bipolar disorder or anxiety but I saw
that there was a whole lot of evolving
mental health problems for the digital
Generation video game addiction
pornography addiction and I noticed that
most of the psychiatrists weren't
focused on those we kind of had an
opioid epidemic that's still going on a
lot of problems with alcohol and
marijuana but there all these digital
addictions that are emerging and those
are the people that I work with now
Erica yeah who are you and what you
doing I'm Erica I'm independent adult
filmmaker I'm an entrepreneur I made my
first short film explicit short film 20
years ago and then I developed a career
in this space of Indie adult cinema and
are you a director yes of adult films
yeah I direct films I produce films I
also run the company
to set the stage on where we are with
pornography I found some statistics
which I thought were quite pertinent to
the discussion which is the first
statistic is that 30% of all internet
traffic roughly is related to
pornography 35% of all internet
downloads are pornographic in nature 79%
of young men view pornography monthly
64% of young adults actively seek out
pornography weekly or more often one in
five mobile searches are for
pornographic content 58% of men and 38%
of women watch porn at work and
pornography websites receive more
traffic than Netflix Amazon and Twitter
combined interestingly I found another
statistic which said that pornography in
Poland has increased 310% between 2004
which I guess is when you got into the
business and
2016 some other sort of potentially
adjacent Trends which I thought were
interesting were that the percentage of
men aged 18 to 24 reporting no sexual
activity in the past year increased from
18.9% in 2000 to over 30% in 200 16 and
similar increases in sexual activity are
seen in men and women um similar
decreases in sexual activity have been
seen in men and women among high school
students the percentage who have never
had sexual intercourse increased from
45% in 91 to 70% in 21 and finally the
average age of first exposure to
pornography is now just 11 years old and
64% of young people report to that they
came across pornography by accident so I
guess my first um point of discussion
that I wanted to raise is is
pornography a benefit to people and
society and I realize that this question
is intentionally short and narrow but
that's the basis of the first
conversation and I want to start with
you Erica is porn a benefit to people in
society it can be it can be definitely
and especially to the others who haven't
really had that right to pleasure to
desire to the sexuality remember that
women's sexuality especially has been
been so much about pleasing others I
think that it can help women to find you
know their own desire to understand
their sexuality to see others what they
like what they are doing and to turn
their Liberty on Liber on which is
obviously one of the things that so many
women are struggling with let's go
anticlockwise Dr K I'll repeat this
statement is porn a benefit to people in
society the way that corn is being
produced and consumed is starting to
cause way more harm than good I mean the
the the statistics that you really just
machine gunned out right like it's like
one thing after another thing after
another thing of things that are you
know very scary like each statement that
both of y'all made I could think about a
specific person that I've worked with
where it's like yeah I've seen that
problem I've seen that problem um you
know early exposure so when you get
exposed to pornography before puberty so
everyone thinks that pornography is
about you know like sexual lust and and
this kind of stuff and I think in a in a
good way it can be but what I've seen a
lot adults for adults is that children
are getting exposed and I've seen like a
very scary correlation between early
exposure to pornography like seven eight
nine years old right so I think your
statistic was the average is 11 yeah
that's average which means that there
are people that are higher and people
that are lower and when something I
don't know what exactly but when we get
exposed to pornography very early it
makes some kind of alteration in our
brain that makes us way more likely to
addictions not only pornography but
other things so I think that there you
know sexuality is a healthy part of
human existence um a lot of the current
research suggests that masturbation is
also like relatively speaking not
unhealthy it's somewhat healthy and so
pornography can be a part of that I
think especially listening to Erica and
how pornography can be used to elevate
Horizons increase awareness um there can
be benefits but I think what we're
clearly seeing is a trend of it being
damaging so I would say that I agree
with Erica completely I think there's
actually some data to suggest that women
who use pornography have better sexual
satisfaction rates have more frequency
of sexual encounters because they're
learning about their bodies I mean we
can't know exactly why that is but we
know there is a correlation in that
specific way and so when people are
using pornography for sexual curiosity
um for pleasure um they're generally
showing good for for the most part
without any signs of addiction or or
concerns of compulsion and use of
pornography they're using it in in a
good way and they're having better sex
because of it now in terms of using it
as a couple there's also really strong
correlations that couples that use
pornography together have better sexual
encounters and better sexual
satisfaction so I think there's a lot of
ways that pornography is used in a
positive way and not to undermine that
there are people who struggle with it
absolutely but I think yes there are
some benefits it allows people to
experience fantasies to see different
types of sexual cultures as Erica
mentioned and I think that that that is
an important side of pornography in
terms of um using that to learn what you
like and learn what you want to try in
your relationship if that's applicable
much of the literature that I've read
about and the studies I've read about
show
that if you consume pornography you're
somewhat desensi ties to the real thing
I.E sex in your relationships and when
we look at those stats on sexlessness
people are having less sex than previous
years people are losing their virginity
later and later and I wonder if that is
we've sort of been desensitized to the
real thing because of pornography Reena
absolutely so I think that there is
certainly people who feel they use
pornography as a way to achieve pleasure
and that is the sole way that they
achieve pleasure so they are constantly
using pornography and it's sometimes
correlated with a certain style of
masturbation and those things cannot be
replicated with penetrative intercourse
of any kind or you know manual
intercourse with another person and so
in those cases then it becomes difficult
because your brain habituates to that
style of stimulation and excitement and
visual sense Sensations that they're
getting from watching pornography and so
that does happen to some individuals I
would say say it's not the large
majority but certainly we're seeing more
of it what is the impact though on the
brain especially a young brain that is
exposed to pornography yeah I mean
there's no we there's no studies on kids
looking at pornography so I couldn't
tell you exactly but you might be able
to talk a look more about this yeah I
mean so like first of all I think this
is a fascinating discussion and if I can
kind of track back and freestyle for a
bit so I thought it was so interesting
because Stephen asked this question
right and he's like you know is
pornography a problem and then I thought
it was so interesting that the two women
at the table had the more positive
answers and the dude is like it's bad
right so I I think the first thing to
understand is that and it's so for me
it's eye openening to hear both of y'all
talk because I I think so much of it is
like your experience of it right we're
talking about pornography as if it's an
isolated thing but the biggest takeaway
that I already have is that there is a
relationship between the human and the
pornography uh Erica was talking about
you know how the pornography can be used
to help the human understand sexuality
become more familiar with pleasure that
we have con with your desire yeah and we
have this orgasm Gap and then and then
you know she's and Arena was saying you
know we don't I forgot exactly what you
said but something about we don't see it
very much or you said that the the
problems of um you know sexuality
relating to pornography are I thought
you said not that common which is which
is something that I'm not saying it's
common or uncommon I think that's just
such an interesting selection difference
because I work with people who have
pornography and like death grip syndrome
because I've never heard it discussed is
like very common what's death grip
syndrome so it's exactly it's a twitch
chat degenerate way of describing what
Dr mik did a great medical job of
describing which is that so what happens
is our body can acclimatize to a certain
kind of stimulation so when um often
times what happens when and I I haven't
worked with too many women and and
sexual stuff way more men um so that
there's a selection bias there too but
often times what happens is that boys or
men will start to masturbate without any
kind of lubrication and so there's a ve
they almost train their bodies physio
physiologically to climax with a certain
degree like a certain you know pounds
per square inch of force and a certain
sensation which they get used to not
only at the physiologic level but also
at the neurological level which Dr mik
alluded to that there's a certain kind
of um visual stimulation that they
almost get used to the brain
acclimatizes to in order to achieve
sexual Climax and then what happens is
when these people have a sexual
relationship for the first time the
sensations and the the from a visual
perspective you know auditory
perspective because the sounds that we
hear in these big you know fast food
pornography Productions are nowhere near
the sounds in real life um and and so
the the inputs of an actual sexual act
make it very difficult to have a A
Satisfied sexual life and so I think
that there's a lot of subtlety to you
know when Dr mik said when couples watch
porn together there are also studies
that show that as you increase your
pornography consumption that correlates
with relationship
dissatisfaction but that could be a
chicken or the egg problem am I watching
more porn because I'm unhappy with the
sexual relationship or does watching
pornography decrease my satisfaction in
the relationship and so I I think it's
there's just like so much here to
explore yeah yeah and I think your point
about the couples usually yeah if
there's a discrepancy in one partner is
watching more porn than the other then
there's s decreased satisfaction
certainly um and I think that your point
to saying that you're seeing a lot of it
well that's these people come to you for
this problem right so you're seeing this
exclusively um but I think in the
general population um and maybe they're
not coming to the urologist as often
right um but certainly I'm not seeing as
much of it and it's not reported in
terms of like people complaining about
it in studies and again these studies
are small numbers and they're not
generalizable to the entire population
but I would say that it's not as common
as I think we let on but the other
important thing to add is that there's a
because it's so nuanced there's a big
moral component people have a belief
about what pornography is good or bad
and so when they watch pornography if
they have a moral in congruence meaning
they think it's bad to watch pornography
they are more likely to report having a
problem with pornography so there's a
lot of nuance here in terms of how
pornography can be beneficial or harmful
to a specific individual and how it
affects that specific individual's
brains whether it's going to send same
Pathways um you know as any sort of
strong visual stimuli the way your body
sensitizes to those Pathways is very
individual and what about poog on the
brain then in terms of its impact on
dopamine and how that then will Cascade
into other areas of Our Lives yeah so I
mean I I'll launch this one um so I I
think that the biggest takeaway that I
have is it is doing way more than we
ever realized so the first thing is if
you get exposed to pornography early on
in life and this accidental exposure by
the way the most common story that I
hear and this is such a weird like
anecdotal statistic is um if you're if
you have older brother and you're a
younger brother I see so many
pornography addicts who have older
brothers and the most common story that
I hear is you know older brother is post
puberty and is watching pornography
which is like a little bit more
understandable and acceptable and then
your younger brother wants to do
whatever you're doing and they get
exposed to it at an early age so the
first thing that we know is that early
exposure correlates with an increase in
potential for addiction that's probably
somewhat neurologic olcal and
potentially somewhat um sociological or
family oriented because if you think
about what kind of seven-year-old will
get exposure to pornography maybe
parents aren't in the house as much so
there could be other risk factors but we
we absolutely know that when you
activate in an artificial way the
dopaminergic circuitry of the brain it
sensitizes the dopaminergic circuitry
and makes it more vulnerable to dopamine
later on this is something called the
kindling effect we see this also for
example in like marijuana as a gateway
drug the reason marijuana is a gateway
drug is is not because it makes you
immoral it's because once we start
activating certain circuits in the brain
during brain development it changes the
way that they develop the second thing
that we see is that pornography is used
as a method of emotional regulation so
if you look at like I was trying to
figure out what effect does pornography
have in the brain and so I was thinking
about okay which part of the brain does
sex come from and it turns out that
every part of the brain every
neurotransmitter is involved in the
sexual act because the purpose The
evolutionary purpose of a human being is
to procreate so all of our circuitry is
designed for this thing so we we see
that there's absolutely an emotional
regulation component um because when we
get aroused like our brain doesn't care
about you know anything else in our life
when it comes to the act of procreation
so we see a lot of emotional regulation
which then becomes an emotional crutch
so I see a lot of this now with where um
people at work will watch pornography
and it's not about masturbation or lust
it's about emotional regulation I've
seen a huge spike in second screen
pornography so we'll be working over
here and I'll just have porn like
running over here like this is a a
really common story and it's an
emotional regulation effect now the
third thing that that you uh the
question you asked about is dopamine so
here's a really fascinating thing so it
absolutely messes with your dopamine
when it messes with your dopamine it
messes with your motivation because
dopamine is the prim neurotransmitter
involved in motivation so as you watch
more pornography you just stop being as
motivated about the other things in your
life and the Really crippling thing the
really scary thing from a relationship
standpoint is that if we look at falling
in love falling in love is
primarily the function of dopamine so
when we look at a relationship there's
initial attraction which it comes from
like the thalamus in our sensory inputs
what do I see what do I hear oh she
smells great her laugh is beautiful
right that's all sensory and then we get
into the stage where we're in love when
I can't get enough of this person I'm
just sitting with this person we're not
talking we're not doing anything we're
just holding hands and oh I'm so in love
so like literally what creates that
feeling is dopamine and when we start
using pornography on a regular basis our
dopamine stores start to deplete we
start to develop dopamine tolerance and
like literally what I'm seeing
clinically matches with this because
it's harder for people to fall in love
when I talk to younger people now who
are in their 20s and 30s and struggling
to date you know you go on a couple of
dates but what's the problem there's no
chemistry there's no spark that comes
from dopamine so I think we're seeing
all kinds of really scary Downstream
effects from unregulated pornography
use I can't help but feeling that what
you're talking about is a very masculine
experience somehow and that when we're
talking about poror addiction or
compulsory Behavior with
pornography it is very related to men
and that we in our society tends to see
men's experiences as universal
experiences and I think that we lack a
perspective of really where when women
get into this construction of of
addiction of use of pornography is it
Reena do you see it as an addiction so I
you know this is what I think I think
that I the so it's not been termed an
addiction in terms of in medical
vernacular they call it problematic porn
use because it there hasn't been a clear
definition in terms of addiction right
um but I would say that I think that
there are certainly people who have this
experience but there's certainly many
many people who use pornography and
don't develop this tolerance and maybe
it's more common in younger people
because they're getting access to it
sooner and more often and that has yet
to play out at least I tend to see older
patients and so um so that has yet to
play out in in older Generations but I
would say that I think there's many
people who use it fine and don't have an
issue and so I think that while these
issues do exist there's also a whole
bunch of other things that are ongoing
in society right now that may make it
more difficult for people to connect and
for people to feel intimacy with people
because it's very difficult currently
more and more people are not getting
married more and more people are
choosing to stay single for a variety of
reasons I don't think porn is the only
Factor there I do think it is something
that people can control and so they feel
like okay if you feel like you have a
problem with it and you can control
pornography that allows you to feel like
you have control in one area of your
life that then that control can
potentially improve other areas of your
life so I think that there is
correlations here but I think it's very
complex I think the way it affects our
brains is very complex as well and like
dopamine is one way to describe it but
there's you know there's different
sensitivities and how our brain responds
to the same stimuli right the way I
watch pornography the way you watch
pornography the way anyone of us watches
pornography our brains will respond in a
different way um because our receptors
are either more sensitive or less
sensitive and there's no way to really
test that on an individual level one of
the things I found most interesting when
I had the first conversation on this
podcast about pornography is my my team
went out and looked at um a couple of
tools which pull search data so what are
people searching on the subject and the
number one most search term was how do I
quit pornography and that's quite an
interesting thing because there's a
certain desperation to that question
you know going to Google to ask Google
how you quit a behavior that makes me
think of it in the context of an
addiction and in fact the second most
popular search term was also about how
how you quit this thing and and it
speaks to a certain powerlessness that a
certain percentage of people feel they
have with pornography um throwing that
out to to everybody here no but I think
this connects also to the stigma the
huge stigma around sex and around porn
and this idea that people have somehow
that it is bad I mean people want to
watch it at the same time they they have
the moral idea that it's bad and that
they shouldn't do it but I think we're
also talking here I mean we end up
talking about porn all the time but
somehow porn is now very related to
technology and how technology kind of
has hijacked Our Lives it's not only
porn we're struggling with in that sense
and when you know with young people
people they are saying they are not
having as much sex anymore you were
talking about it before uh kids are not
playing as much anymore outside as they
used to so I think we have a correlation
there that we need to think about the
role of technology and then how much of
that space does really this pornography
take up and also to have in mind that
when we're talking about po porn most
people see it as a monolithic kind of
thing when when if you go out on the
street and you ask people what is porn
they think about the tube sites that's
what that's what they have in mind but
actually there's many different kinds of
porn existing do you think there's such
a thing as good porn and bad porn it's a
very difficult kind of Distinction to
say bad porn and good porn because if
you do that then it's you classify some
type as as acceptable and other types as
nonone and you kind of you know grow the
stigma around it I think that we need to
think about porn that is made with great
working conditions taking care of
everybody who's involved in that process
especially the performers made with uh
support by intimacy coordinator Talent
managers where the performers have been
able to be involved in the process to
give feedback on what is going to be how
how it's working they have they know all
the conditions beforehand Etc they can
give feedback afterwards H I think there
are ways of producing pornography that
are safer than what we have seen in the
past we were talking a second ago about
the impact pornography has on the brain
um and I know some of your work involves
dealing with people who have erectile
dysfunction some of the stats I read on
erectile dysfunction show that there's
been quite a significant increase over
the last couple of decades in people
reporting to have erectile function do
you think porn has played a role in
increasing erectile dysfunction as it
relates to when I'm with my partner in
the bedroom and I'm trying to have sex
so I think this goes back to the people
who are watching pornography and are
learning what sex is through pornography
and then they go to their sexual
encounter with their partner and they
don't respond the way that they do on
pornography or their partner doesn't
respond the way they do on pornography
and immediately they feel insecure right
immediately and that leads to this
psychogenic ere dysfunction where you
are no longer able to perform because
you're so stressed about the anxiety of
being able to get an erection because
maybe things didn't go the way they were
supposed to or maybe you're insecure
about your body image or a whole host of
things that come from watching maybe
some of the big box pornography where
we're not really showing real sex we're
showing a produced product that is meant
to entertain and uh Captivate people for
a short period of time and so I think
that is one certainly issue that I do
see where people start feeling this the
other thing is where people are um you
know using pornography over quite often
and then they again are are unable to
get that stimulation through a partner
right they can't get the same they're
using death grip or they're using um you
know the same this very erotic stimuli
very intense visual erotic stimuli that
they can't produce with a person and so
then they're like why am I not getting
aroused and why am I not getting an
erection and it's because they've now
relied on this solely so I do see that
certainly um as an issue in some people
who are using pornography but I don't
think it's like pornography use leads to
ED I think it's these other factors on
the way to having psychological concerns
about your own performance that lead to
issues with directions and before we
move on on Dr K's point about motivation
as well do you believe that there's a
correlation between the amount that we
watch pornography and mass debate and
someone's motivation based on what you
know about dopamine receptors you know
hard to say I think again it's very
individual certainly some people will
take the E like you know there is a
availability part when it comes to any
sort of addiction type Behavior so when
something is more available to you and
you're using it more often it can become
more problematic and so certainly I
think that plays a role in terms of like
if you're using it a lot and it's very
available to you and it's an easy way to
emotionally regulate right if you're
having stress and life you're unhappy
with your relationship or you're unhappy
with other things people are often using
pornography as a way to avoid those
negative emotions and really just
participate in something else like take
their mind off of that and so that is
sort of where it becomes this challenge
for some people yeah I just wanted to
chime in so this is fantastic because
because I I I agree with everything that
y'all are saying and I also kind of come
to a slightly different conclusion so
the number one search term that we have
is how do I I quit porn so when I hear
that and and I think Dr mik has also
done a great job of pointing out you
know there's a difference between
anecdotal clinical experience and what
we have randomized clinical trials on
you know we're not exposing
seven-year-olds to pornography and then
seeing how their brain develops by doing
MRI scans over the course of 10 years so
some of this research is absolutely not
there and we also have the number one
search term is how do I quit porn what
that tells me is that there is the
literally the largest population of what
people are looking at is to stop using
pornography and I think the reason for
that is is there good porn or is there
bad porn is it individual is it Nuance
completely agree with all those points
it's not a problem for everyone but I
think what I'm seeing very clearly is
that it's getting worse right so it's
not an issue of good or bad what is the
trend that we're seeing we're Tren the
trend that we're seeing is that Erica is
saying hey pornography can be more than
the tube sites so that then begs the
question why does everyone think that
pornography is the tube sites because
they hijacked the system exactly so I
think that word is is beautiful hijack
so I think what we're seeing what I'm
seeing is that pornography is getting
worse for sure it's becoming more of a
problem if we look at these tube sites
there there you know it's kind of like
there's nutrition and then there's
calories and a lot of what I'm hearing
y'all talk about you know Dr mik is
saying if you watch it as part of a
relationship ship that's nutrition it
can be something healthy we can learn
about ourselves we can destigmatize
various things fair enough but I think
we're seeing the same trends that we see
with like fast food where now
pornography is becoming mass-produced
and there are actually studies that show
there's a really fascinating
bizarre piece of research right which is
where the you have to go this is where
I've gone to find this stuff because we
don't have studies but there was a
particular group of biologists who were
noticing that a population of beetles
was dying out and they were trying to
figure out like why is this population
of beetles dying out and what they
discovered is there's one thing that's
responsible for these beetles not mating
with each other which is green beer
bottles that were being littered and the
green beer bottle then what they noticed
is that the Beatles were trying to go up
to the green beer bottle and mate with
it and they were like what is going on
you'd see this this litter that has a
green beer bottle and a bunch of male
beetles are clustered around it and like
they're like what is this and it turns
out that there's this concept of
something called a supera normal
stimulus so when a Beetle's eyes look at
the environment there's certain signals
that indicate this is a fertile female
and a green glass beer bottle activates
those parts of the brain and what we're
seeing with these tube sites is things
are [__] things are louder things are
slipperier right we have these 4K high
defa like so we're we're sort of turning
we're taking what used to be nutritious
and we are turning it into fast food and
that and what why all these tube sites
why are they successful they're in this
darwinian war that's kind of like a race
to the bottom how can I create the
pornography that is going to leech the
most traffic away from my competitors
and they're figuring out very rapidly
that there are all kinds of weird ways
to activate the brain what our brain
looks for and what it gets excited about
and so it feels to me like there's a
race to the bottom we're making
pornography for money we're making it
more addtive but the thing is that these
companies Behind these tube sites they
are not interested in human sexuality
they're not interested in sex they're
not interested in porn they're not
interested in the conditions of the
people who are working in front of the
camera I mean they're selling
advertisement and what do they need for
that they need content that is Extreme
that has words that are click baity that
are kind of small clips that are quick
to watch they look at the algorithms to
see what works right but this reminds me
of the food industry yeah of course it's
the same as big F the same as big farmer
big fashion Etc big porn is the same how
does an industry succeed if it doesn't
engage in that practice though if
because think about the food industry
the thing that has the most sugar in
that's the most available the cheapest
is the thing that's going to succeed the
most so in the we think about these tube
sites some of the stats are crazy I mean
only fans released their earnings for
last year up 20% they made 6.6 billion
um PornHub one of the big tube sites is
the eighth most trafficed website in the
world at the moment doing 5.5 billion
monthly visits these are the brands that
people recognize and it's it's extreme
like if we think about nutrition high in
sugar it's extreme so I get the the most
extreme sort of dopamine stimulation
it's so easy to access I can one I don't
have to put my shoes on and put my After
Shave on I can just I can get on there
within 15 seconds for me to get laid I'm
going to have to put in some work I'm
going to have to go to the gym I'm going
to have to take care of I'm going to
have to go get a job I'm going to have
to get some money I'm going to Le I'm
going to have to learn how to speak to a
woman or 15 seconds and I can see the
most
extreme yeah I I think that's the
problem but I do worry to some I'm going
to play a little bit of Devil's Advocate
my devil's advocate would say that
because there's so much moral in
congruence that leads to problematic
porn news porn addiction whatever you
want to call it right that we're
creating more of it by disparaging
pornography right like that everywhere
people are saying pornography is bad
pornography is bad you can't go on any
social media platform without somebody
citing a study that says pornography is
leeching people's life force and their
you know their life is falling apart
because of pornography and Destroy lives
right and and so but so then we're also
adding to that moral in congruence by
saying that all pornography is bad
pornography is there because we're
watching it right and so people like if
you asked like probably the generation
older to me like would you be would you
be watching porn where you're seeing um
the things that you're seeing now which
I mean shocking to me right like they
would be like no I don't want to see
that right like I that doesn't interest
me in the slightest but like why is this
becoming so you know people are watching
it I mean to me so much of this is
totally anti-erotic I sometimes go there
to investigate and to kind of see what's
what's going on and what's happening and
I feel like oh no don't J it is I don't
want to see it oh I rather throw up than
you know feel excitement and wanting to
to have sex so it has an opposite effect
on on lots of their their audiences
actually but again what is it about the
it's about earning money and
concentrating power it's about selling
advertisement that's what they're doing
it's grow your dick pills it's dat the
sexy Latina in your neighborhood
it's and and as a society we have been
very slow to see what has happened
because these sides they were born you
know 17 years ago 2007 they came out it
happened very very
fast so a couple of thoughts the first
is like yeah that's exactly what's going
on is like so if we think about it we
have all of these every part of our
brain right oxytocin dopamine serotonin
estrogen testosterone right those are
hormones not brains but you know every
Circuit of the brain all of our
neurotrans MERS they're all to help us
procreate and now what's happened is
people have fundamentally
hijacked all of these circuits and we're
seeing problems and I'm with you about
the moral in congruence because we see
this in other addictions as well where
we we tried to like demonize like
alcohol usage right and we know that
once we separate out the moral in
congruence because once I feel guilty
and ashamed this is something I see a
lot I watch pornography now I feel
ashamed how am I going to cope with
those emotions watching more pornography
and so you create thisy
of like like this moral Focus cycle of
Shame and that actually fuels the
dependence so that's absolutely an issue
at the same time like these companies
and they don't care about erotic or
Falling in Love or Whatever right
they're interested in making a buck and
they're exploiting our brain and while
we should be a little bit careful about
the moralistic nature of it I mean I've
seen it gets so much it's getting worse
like every time every year and this
could be selection bias right cuz I I'm
an addiction psychiatrist but I I think
it's like even with something like only
fans because now what we're adding is a
social component the one Refuge we used
to have when it comes to pornography
whether it's ethically produced or non-
ethically produced is that there's no
way that this person is ever going to
pay attention to me I'm just consuming
something but now now I can interact
with someone someone can send me a DM
hey thank you for watching my video and
jerking off that makes me so happy but
you know it's an AI bot right sometimes
so so so I know it's an AI bot but I am
so ashamed of myself that you know take
whatever water is given to you in the
desert I am so alone I am I feel so bad
about myself and there's a chance right
there's a chance it's not an AI problem
the real problem is that we are not
speaking about sex we are not speaking
about intimacy people don't have the sex
education and they are lost and they are
human beings they have this drive and
this need and we had it in all cultures
right do you think people had the sex
education they would still be on only
fans talking to what's probably cuz
there are big agencies now I've seen on
social media there are big agencies of
men who pretend to be these porn stars
on sites like only fans and I I see them
bragging about their income it's this
big thing on Twitter at the moment I've
made $10,000 this month pretending to be
this actress speaking to young men on
only fans yeah and I think the reason
that men do that part of the reason is
because they know what men want to hear
right there's a part of us that they
know exactly what to say because it
won't be an AI bot it'll be this kind of
person and now what's happening is we're
activating the social loneliness aspect
and combining it with pornography so now
you actually have a relationship with
maybe an AI bot maybe a dude right but
there is like some amount of genuine
human interaction over the Internet so
this is getting worse and I think sex
education is an excellent point at the
same time I don't know if sex education
is going to be sufficient because I
think we can teach people about their
bodies but we're also seeing like a wh
scale social skills atrophy where dudes
don't know how to talk to girls anymore
yeah and also media porn is Media it's
important to understand that it's
telling us messages about gender roles
how we interact about sexuality how our
body functions Etc so when we have all
this
misinformation going on on this online
huge media of free porn and we see women
screaming in fake orgasms after four
minutes of hard penetration and as a
woman you look at her and you say she
didn't even use her fingers what
happened you know and you just know that
something is wrong here that this is
fake but then there's lots of men out
there thinking this is what my
girlfriend should be doing this is how
it should work and then they don't
connect in real life what kind of point
do you make what kind of porn do I make
I make I make lovely porn I make
beautiful porn I make cinematic porn I
make porn with you know with intentions
of of of
showing different uh ideas of desire and
fantasy where people I try to work with
people who are connecting who show
chemistry together I ask my performers
who they want to work with I try to team
them up I support them with a system of
intimacy coordinator Talent managers
producers in the background that take
care of them that check who they are
what they like what kind of sexuality do
they have but if I was a consumer of
your pornography what would I notice
that what would you notice probably the
great cinematography would be the first
thing you would notice kind of
narratives uh that are erotic driven
somehow where people explore their
desire and their sexuality you would
notice
um you you would feel very I mean many
people tell me they they Go like Erica
but I watch your films is it really porn
because they identify porn as something
that is kind of tacky
agly kind of objectifying Etc so
suddenly when they see people in my
films having sex coming together and
everything is kind of you understand why
they are Desiring each other and you
kind of I am invite them to join this
kind of erotic journey of the characters
then they go but this is more like like
in the in the cinema in the eroic cinema
can I is it fair to assume that because
you from what I've heard though the
pornography you produce is has a slower
story arc which is more reflective of
what sometimes okay so so I'm trying to
because the things that you it sounds
like you might have yeah removed from
the pornography you make yeah versus the
pornography I'd find on one of of the
big tube streaming sites the most
popular videos on the tube streaming
sites it sounds like you might have put
yourself at a bit of a competitive
disadvantage in many respects because
those streaming sites if their incentive
is purely money yeah the data is going
to determine what people see so that's
so it feels like they've really
optimized for user consumption where
you've optimized for something around
ethics because I care about it for me
the money is not the most important
aspect why I you know created this
company why I'm making this I really
want to kind of send a different kind of
message out to the world do your content
end up on those sites sometimes
sometimes uh years ago it was taken on
those sites for example changing the
wording of it because remember that many
of these sites also what they do is that
they fetishize people they use very
racist language chauvinistic language
Etc
and my movies may have much softer kind
of language and the way they are so uh
they they obviously pirated them they
put them up and they changed kind of the
wording for for the bits it was a very
hard process to take them down Etc what
do you think is better for someone's
relationship specifically so men and
women do you think no porn is better for
their relationship do you think your
porn is better for their relationship or
do you think and obviously I think it's
individual I think it's a very
individual decision what works best
sorry yeah I can answer I've never seen
one of your films I can tell you it's
her porn thank you better than no porn
I'm going to go ahead and go out on a
limb and saying that if you're someone
who's struggling with
pornography watching an erotic film with
a glass of wine with your significant
other is a great way to
transition from bite-sized Fast Food
calorie dense [__] slippery loud porn
two it's like how do we rewire the brain
right how do we move one step at a time
from this to this and because like like
the word erotic seems so powerful to me
it's about anticipation even when we
talk about you know differences between
male and in female sexuality the the lag
time of parasympathetic activation in
foreplay is so much more important
biologically and correct me if I'm wrong
here um uh for women than it is for men
I mean we're like kind of ready to go
and we want to make it short and and so
I think like it's almost like a part of
that sexual education is in
understanding okay how can we teach men
to be erotic again instead of these like
very like chicken nugget style highly
processed like this is what I think it
is maybe watch some of Erica's film when
we talk about watching pornography with
your partner I wonder if that is the
rule of the exception to the rule you
know because I yeah I mean so you're
saying what do we do I think we have an
erotic film watch party
right we have anime watch parties we
have different kinds of watch parties
like this thought had never occurred to
me before I'm sure it is a terrible
idea on that point though if you reduce
the stigma by having these watch parties
um does that then because you cited
earlier that it's a tool for emotional
regulation so when people are stressed
or depressed or anxious they seek it out
if we remove the stigma does that
increase the addiction so it's a great
question so I think there's it kind of
goes both ways and what I mean by that
is see we run into addictions when this
substance becomes or or behavior becomes
one to one correlated with something
else so right now the problem with
pornography isn't that it it yeah it's
so the problem is if I watch pornography
and that's the only method I use to
regulate my emotions that will increase
the addiction now the flip side of it is
also true if the only reason I watch
pornography is to regulate my emotions
that will strengthen that addiction
capability so I'll give you all just a
simple example from like alcohol right
so if I use alcohol after A Hard Day's
Work to get through the day and calm
down and then I stop drinking for fun
whereas alcohol can be used as an
emotional coping mechanism or it can be
used to celebrate a wedding right so the
substance can be used in different ways
and the more that we use it in different
ways in healthier ways the more it
actually chips away at the addiction in
some cases this is also highly
individualized so depending on your
genetic predisposition dispositions and
stuff like that you know you may not be
able to drink at weddings but we also
see the opposite which is like you know
a huge number of people are qualify for
an alcohol addiction in college and then
most of those people are able to develop
healthy relationships with it and one of
the biggest changes we're seeing in
addiction is that there do seem to be
healthy relationships that we can
develop I think it's about changing our
relationship to the thing now seeing
someone naked engaging in a sexual act
is not solely about getting off it's not
solely about emotional regulation it's
not solely about dopamine it can now
become a film experience that we can
enjoy so we're diversifying our
relationship to the object I don't know
if that makes sense psychoanalytic
awareness mindfulness understanding of
other of how you use that how you and
then I I think this is also great like
just the simple idea that like if dudes
are watching this recognizing watching
an erotic film with your significant
other assuming a heteronormative a
heterosexual relationship you know may
be a great way for you to enhance your
sexual experience you don't need dick
enhancing pills or or you know whatever
else right like because that's and I'm
sure Dr mik knows better than I do but
you the majority of the no I I meant
more as a
year I didn't think that but
okay no no so so like you know my
understanding from med school right so
back when I was doing Urology and I I
work with some things like vaginismus
and stuff like that yeah um is you know
the majority of the female nerve endings
are are you know at the front end of the
vagina and if you get all the way back
to the cervix that's like painful so you
don't actually need a gigantic penis I
was trying to think about whether I
should use some other word but you know
and and so to help like you know if men
are the ones who are primarily having
this addictive problem then let's call
it what it is which is help men realize
that sex ual pleasure engaging in a
relationship that pornography can be a
force for good and doesn't necessarily
have to be evil but and maybe like
erotic film moves Us in that direction
and like I just got to say man like my
degenerate male brain is kind of telling
me like you know watching an erotic film
for an hour and a half could be the best
and easiest foreplay that I could ever
do would be a lot easier yeah pretty
quick um but I would say the other thing
I've been thinking about while we've
been talking about this is we don't talk
about erotic audio literature or erotic
books which is more commonly used by
women but we don't stigmatize that like
women are like oh I love these books and
I read them all the time and nobody is
sitting here saying like it's bad I know
thoughts on that because it's not naked
bodies I guess here the main problem
again is back to to our bodies we are
somehow ashamed of our bodies of our
nakedness of our
sexuality I mean women can show nipples
online we know that uh you can I I mean
I'm heavily censured I can't show
anything on my accounts my my social
media accounts are cut off all the time
it's impossible to grow do you think
pornography should be bound on social
media Dr K should pornography be banned
on social media yes pornography should
be banned I can answer that I'm I'm I'm
making it I definitely think it should
be banned but I don't that the explicit
images should be banned but the right to
discuss about it to talk about it to
give uh sexual advice or to you know
discuss different topics around
sexuality we should be allowed to do
that we should be allowed well we're
allowed to do that no I get I get banned
too really cuz this doesn't get banned
maybe you are allowed to YouTube is
different Twitter's fine Instagram's
fine YouTube's fine Instagram Instagram
I have Ted Talks that are censured so
only people who are over 18 and have an
account online have access to watch
watch them and it's me
talking yeah no it there is definitely
uh limitations the thing that we've
noticed is your video just doesn't
appear in search in the same way but
they still recommend the video so when
we had for example Andrew huberman on a
couple of weeks ago and he talked about
pornography because PA was in the title
in the thumbnail the video got huge
recommendations by the algorithm but if
you typed in Andrew hub
it would not come up until we CH took
the word porn out and you type in Andrew
hubman and it comes up so that's the
only we've noticed but we've been quite
surprised actually
by yeah I I think it's so cool that like
you know you asked me that question and
she jumped in with an answer no no I
think it's good I I think it's like
because you asked I mean I think that's
the value of this right because my I I
don't feel nearly as passionate I mean
you asked her the question you know is
it which of these is the best and I
jumped in with an answer I was like this
is clear to me and and I I think just a
couple of things that I just want to
touch on the first is that um you know
what Dr bollock was saying about you
know audio Literature Like erotic
fiction or romance novels right so I I
think it's harder to commoditize that
which goes back to Erica's point of of
you know like some things are more
likely to be turned into fast food so I
think that erotic literature it's like
harder to do that um I also do think
that going back to this earlier point of
like you know men are epidemiologically
more vulnerable to addiction I think
it's more complicated than that in
just psychological hurt or problems
manifest in men as addiction and look
different in in women when it emerges um
so I think it's kind of like you know so
we're we're sort of seeing a difference
in addictive quality it's easier to
commoditize more sensory organs uh so I
think that's an important point and I I
think in terms of you know should it be
banned or not like I don't know um so I
work kind of like more at the individual
level and arguably some at scale but
like like one of the key things is you
know I have some ideas about what should
be done but I I'm not too sure about
that I'm I'm curious you know I I don't
know like I no but I'm saying it
basically because it's open for kids
again this is why I'm saying if if we're
having social media and it's for people
18 about then we're talking about
another thing but go to Twitter or it's
not called Twitter anymore uh the X go
there and it's full of porn it is it is
it is full of porn you can you
accidentally stumble across porn I was
saying this to my partner a couple of
weeks ago I said look at how Twitter's
changed and I said watch this scroll
down my timeline and I know there's ALG
so if I dwell on something more often
then it's going to show me more but I
scroll
down I scroll down I was like look porn
and I was like oh look she's taking her
close of scroll scroll scroll I didn't
realize it was new to the it didn't
happen I've actually not seen it but
I've had many people who tell me that it
comes up on their feet all the time
recent change to the algorithm which is
prioritized again um View time so if you
want to want people to dwell longer show
them video Extreme video people being
shot someone being hit by a car fights
pornography wow you increase your dwell
time you increase your advertising and
this is just how incentives play out so
much of the discussion we've had today
and much of my
like why I refer to it sometimes as
being idealistic because sometimes it
can sound like just give them
broccoli when actually if you leave them
to their own devices no one's going to
want broccoli they're going to take the
cookies if the cookies are available and
If you equate this to food we did put
labels on food to say look this has got
this much calories in it we've put a
sugar tax on sugar in the UK we you on
cigarettes we say if you smoke these
cigarettes this is what's going to
happen to your lungs and we put explicit
images of how your lungs will get you
know cancers and things like this should
we be doing something similar with
pornography because part of me goes just
you know saying we should just give them
broccoli this kind of like erotic
different point they're not going to
they're not going to eat it no but but
but also again adults I think they have
the right to watch pornography
whatever kind of pornography it is as
long as it's legal and and and well done
I wish all pornography would be
ethically produced I know that the
industry is working towards more
standards Etc because you know we have
been as a society talking about it they
don't have much of a choice because if
they don't go that way should we should
we tell them about the harms of
pornography at the point of consumption
like we do with
cigarettes it's a bit difficult Maybe
maybe I I think we should we should talk
about what could happen like gambling
what effects like like gambling like but
but this also happens you you've been
talking about gaming a lot you know
there's a way of of gaming and healthy
gaming right there's a way of video
games that is too much and not too much
I what do you think don't okay yeah so I
mean I think it's it's a great question
so I've got like um a couple of
different things so I'm going to about
to contradict myself so the first is
that we know that you know putting
warning labels on things does move
things in the right direction but I love
to just share a story so when I was a
medical student didn't really understand
much about medicine or Psychiatry or
humans um you know I had a patient who
came in and was smoking and so I I came
in and I was like you know he came in I
was like a first year medical student so
I was like I'm gonna be a doctor one day
and so this person comes in I'm like sir
do you know that smoking is dangerous it
can cause lung cancer it can do this it
can do this it can do this so the
person's like yeah you know oh like that
sounds bad I don't want L cancer I was
like great we're going to give you like
a prescription to help you quit and you
can get a nicotine patch and like I was
like I'm going to be a doctor one day so
month later guy comes in and like I ask
him how's the quitting smoking going and
he's like well I I'm still smoking and
then I was like I don't think you
understand man it increases risk of
heart disease and stroke and all these
kinds of things like it's going to like
do all this kind of stuff and he's like
yeah oh that's bad I don't want any of
that stuff and I was like cool so like
you're going to quit right and he's like
yeah and so I then he comes in and I I
comes in the next month he still hasn't
quit and I started to try to figure out
what's going on right so one of the key
things that we learned is that if you
want someone to eat broccoli instead of
cookies um telling them that cookies are
unhealthy for you isn't good enough so
we need generally speaking when you look
at recovery from addiction and
behavioral change you have to have a
good enough reason to do it yeah so I
was still blunt and I figured this out
and talk to my my preceptor and stuff
and then I asked this person so what's
important to you and he's like oh you
know I love my daughter
and then I asked them a very bad
question I was like when you and he was
like I was like what you know tell me
about your daughters and he was like you
know I can't wait like I'll know I can
die a happy person once I've walked them
down the aisle and I they're married and
stuff like that and then I asked him a
question I was like when you walk down
the aisle do you want to be carrying an
oxygen tank behind you and he was like
what I was like if you keep smoking
that's what's going to happen or maybe
you'll be in a wheelchair right so I was
a first year medical student kind of
brutal but that actually sunk in you
have to connect with people with what
they care about yeah that is still a
warning though isn't it you've put a
warning on that Absol but it's it's it's
a little different right so so it's
individualized but even now when we you
know I'm I stream on Twitch and I try to
get people to stop playing video games
which is like holding an AA meeting in a
bar and what I've discovered is I'm with
you we've lost a lot of faith in
humanity if you give them a broccoli and
a cookie they're going to take a cookie
but I I'm still hopeful I think that we
do see the number one search is how do I
quit porn there's a lot of energy in
desire to do it they just don't have a
path and I think one of these very
simple things is like emphasizing an
erotic film and telling people hey if
you're lonely hey if you're having
trouble finding a relationship you know
hey if you're if you have a problem with
premature ejaculation or you're having
difficulty engaging in a sexual act and
can't achieve orgasm what you need to do
is slow it down don't make sex a three
minute jiggly slippery experience slow
it down watch an erotic film reprogram
your brain like I bet you money that if
we somehow figured out if we told people
you can reprogram your brain by watching
erotic film and we could say that
scientifically that would be incredibly
successful because I think people are
hungry for this right they're hungry for
what we were biologically designed to do
which is connect and have fulfilling
sexual relationships what's your take on
that Dr yeah I think that that's that
would be helpful absolutely because I
think's telling someone to go cold
turkey from having something that they
do derive pleasure from right even if
they're even if they have addictive
potential addictive personalities
towards that behavior then giving them
something else that they can still
derive pleasure from and have the the
benefits of orgasm and have the benefits
of feeling that desire and enjoyment is
is a really great way when you tell
someone you take something away that
they've used as a crutch potentially and
they have nothing to replace it with and
I you know we've talked about this far
giving people a purpose a lot of times
people don't have purpose and so they're
they're like they have nothing else to
do and they're like oh I'll just do this
thing because I'm bored and that's one
of the reasons people watch porn is
because they're bored and so you give
them a purpose something else to do
whether it's an erotic film or actually
purpose in their life um maybe it's
meeting people outside in the real world
which would be even better that would
help our our issues with not getting
married having high divorce rates and
not having kids right but like I think
those would be great Solutions if we
could come up with ways to get people to
either find a substitute or find purpose
interestingly there's clearly a two-way
relationship with purpose porn
motivation Etc so it we giving them a
purpose one might say well then we stop
porn because then I'll have more
motivation to put their shoes on yeah so
I I think you know if you look at
there's one study that showed the two
strongest variables with pornography
addiction or a sense of meaninglessness
in in life and I forget what the other
variable is maybe early age of exposure
um but so I I I think it's it's kind of
spoton right so when I don't have a life
that's worth living what happens my body
and my brain become squeeze bottles of
dopamine because what is the joy of life
so I try to just extract as much
dopamine as I can for my brain so that I
have some joy in the day some kind of
pleasure and then I watch more of this
mass-produced supernormal stimulus
pornography because that squeezes more
dopamine out of my neurotransmitters and
the more that my life becomes that now
there's a moral component now I feel
ashamed now if I remember looking at
some statistics on online dating
profiles and like saying that you're a
dude who watches porn is like an instant
no but if I'm watching pornography it's
going to sap me of the motivation to
pursue my purpose absolutely so if I'm
extracting all my dopamine through
watching pornography I'm going to have
none left for Behavioral reinforcement
from other activities so what reading
books becomes not as much fun going to a
park becomes not as much fun so it's
absolutely this vicious cycle where
meaninglessness I have no reason to do
anything all day so I might as well
watch some porn not erotic film so we
canel porn then
no so
please let us have it yeah I I don't
know I mean the on you're done the
majority of my income and why brand
would collapse if you started Bing so
short no I mean I think there I think we
have to I I mean I think there's a lot
of things we've talked about but I think
sexual education I think understanding
that you know explaining to younger kids
of what they're watching right I think
adults have a little bit more um their
brains are fully developed they
understand what they're watching they
know it's a produced product they
presumably have already gone through the
process of finding a job and doing other
things that give them purpose maybe they
have children maybe they have a family
right but but the I think it's really in
that Young Generation they're finding
themselves maybe they're going out and
they're not finding a partner because we
know that there's less people coupling
there's higher you know Mis match of
expectations we've talked about that too
in terms of dating and so you know it's
it's very easy for those people when
they're still trying to figure out what
to do with their lives to fall into
something like that and I think if we
really focus on that generation I think
and that's a generation that probably
shouldn't be watching porn anyways right
um and and I think that would make huge
a huge difference and help parents
because parents are really really
worried how' you do it I mean you you
there's many way of kind of of of of
starting it but but they what they need
to know really is that you are there for
them you are open if they have any kind
of of Doubt situations you are going to
be there for them this is not a subject
that you are going to you know bail out
because you feel too ashamed or you
can't handle difficult questions I would
tell parents educate yourself if you're
having kids you're going to have to talk
to them about sex if you didn't get
education what age you need to start
when really really young you need to
start when they're learning language I
mean young kids today many of them they
don't know the difference between a
vagina and a vulva even Billy ish in an
interview came out saying that she
wanted to put her face in in people's
vaginas no and you go what what happened
you're talking about vulva girl you know
yeah no it has to start from I
completely agree with everything you're
saying I have kids I've talked to them
about sex I think you you have to start
early with at least knowing the anatomy
right knowing what their body parts are
and what the body parts of are of the
opposite gender um so that they know
that they're different and and all that
stuff and then honestly being open
they're going to ask you questions like
it's kids are curious and so they'll
come home and be like what's this what's
that and not being like oh no no no I'm
not going to talk about that it's just
like okay yeah let's have a conversation
about it and let's talk about it and
realize that it's not going to be one
conversation it's going to be like
throughout their development as they
become older you're going to maybe
introduce more topics or they may have a
question for you and just never shaming
that and that can come even early right
kids are masturbting babies are
masturbating like as young that's a
soothing Behavior right and so sometimes
you'll see your child doing it you don't
want to shame them right because that's
already setting up that stage of Shame
so sort of allow being like okay that's
that's fine that you're doing that but
maybe do that in private and that's
something that you do in private um but
you know I think it's really important
to have these conversations and it's
uncomfortable it's going to be
uncomfortable and know that it's going
to be uncomfortable but like we have a
duty cuz they're not going to learn it
at school in the way or enough in school
yeah so I I I completely agree with what
they said so it's really interesting
because the number one question so when
we started talk working with Gamers what
happened very quickly is parents started
reaching out and they're like hey I have
a son who's got this problem usually a
son sometimes a daughter 7030 and um how
do I talk to them so we actually started
doing a study in 2020 2020 or 2021 where
we started developing different kinds of
techniques and measuring what worked
best so now we have four years of data
um a lot of those findings went into the
book about how to raise a healthy gamer
which is actually all about
conversational techniques for parents
about how to talk to their kids so for
four years here are the biggest
takeaways uh so that book is like it's
conversational techniques about video
game addiction but we find that this
works really well for pornography too so
the first is uh like Dr mik said um
multiple conversation so the first
mistake that parents make is that they
think that they have to get it all in in
one conversation talk
no it's it's lots of them second thing
start earlier than you think you need to
yeah so one of the biggest principles
that we learn in in you know medicine is
that you don't have endof life
conversations when someone is dying you
have to have the conversation before
it's an issue so I I think we were
talking about you said what 64% of
people get exposed to pornography at the
age of 11 right so accidentally accident
still but so that what that tell parents
think oh I like I can push this off and
wait until they're 14 or
and and of course my Beta is not going
to watch right oh he's good he's so good
not my Beta KS right yeah not in our
house yeah and you I I noticed you said
you talked to your kids about sex have
you talked to them about porn yeah okay
my older one my older one nice good job
thank you um your beta is going to be so
good so so I think it's going to be
multiple conversations start earlier
than you need to and then there are a
couple of really nice techniques that
you can use so the first is asking
open-ended questions and not about you
watch porn it can start with hey are are
you familiar with what pornography is do
you know what it is what do you
understand about pornography another
really good evidence-based technique
which has been shown to be effective for
talking about drugs is do you have
friends who watch porn do you have
friends do you know people or kids in
your school watching this yes or no what
do you think about that so oftentimes
you don't want to ask the kid directly
you want to ask about what's happening
around you and then you can ask them
what do you think about that do you have
questions so make yourself a resource
and signal to them that hey we can have
this
conversation and it's preparing them for
the world really it's giving them the
tools to be able to manage situations
that will come up because sex is not
easy and they're going to be in
difficult moments and if they have been
prepared they're going to know better
how to respond to those moments you know
if they're watching that pornography
though the type that's available on
those tube streaming sites do you
believe that it will cause or lead to a
rise in violence between men and women
because when I look at some of the
statistics around this nearly one in
three porn videos contains physical
violence and almost 90% of the most
famous porn scenes are violence scenes
18 to 21 year olds out of 18 to 21 year
olds 179% had seen pornography involving
sexual violence when they were children
and almost 50% of young people say girls
expect sex to involve physical
aggression such as Airway restriction
and according to a study in
2024 um of 18 to 35 year olds they found
that 57% of young people aged um from 18
to 35 had been strangled themselves
during sex and 51% had been strangled um
at least once during sex and my last
stat on this is the BBC revealed that
38% of women under the age of 40 have
experienced un wanted slapping choking
and gagging during consensual sex and
42% of these women said they felt
pressured or coerced into doing it so we
can allow people to watch pornography
but is there not a risk that at a very
young age at the age of 11 we're going
to learn that sex is a violent act and
that's going to make us more violent G
to start with you yeah this is a really
important discussion and I think you
know I actually spoke to De Debbie
herban who leads a lot of the studies on
strangulation and so basically what they
found is that very commonly Young people
College age students are having
strangulation or during intercourse or
during for plane it's become so common
that it's almost like kissing right like
this is something that is so common and
often consent is not being discussed or
like hey can I do this yeah it's all
right but it's not like a real
discussion and as you guys all know and
especially asphixiation can lead to loss
of oxygen to the brain and and sort of a
whole host of things and so I think
ultimately that is a concern for sure in
terms of um you know we have in movies
for a reason right like we don't show
our kids like the boys for example on
Netflix right because it's very violent
and so similarly we would like to have
ratings on pornography and they
shouldn't have access to it but
sometimes they see it now uh yeah that
is a concern I don't know exactly how to
rectify that maybe you have some
thoughts is that because we want it
though earlier on you said a porn is
there because we we want it so I'm
thinking isn't strangulation in porn
because that's the type of porn that
people want so there is you know some
people who derive pleasure from is you
know from a temporary occlusion of uh of
of breath right and so there is some
people who enjoy that erotically but
that doesn't mean that that's Universal
and um and again it's fantasy so just
because you watch something on
pornography doesn't mean that you should
be doing it it's a fantasy um it's not
real life and that's in a hopefully a
controlled safe situation where they're
producing that pornography but I think
it's very important when we're starting
to talk about sexual violence towards
women that we understand that that
doesn't come from porn that existed long
before porn sexual violence towards
women is a systemic problem we have in
our society and we all know that the
most dangerous place for a woman is her
own home it's her own husband or her
boyfriend or her relatives around her
Etc so the way I see it porn reflects
the values we have in our society I
think I see porn a bit as a mirror of
many of the of of of the values in our
society amongst them sexual violence
towards women but then it's also true
obviously that nowadays as porn has
become more popular we're getting into a
bigger problem right where their
attitudes are also provoked by what they
are seeing so now it's not that easy
anymore to say that porn is just a
reflection because obviously they also
learn from what they see and then they
go into their own lives and they try to
reproduce what they have learned on
online and that's in that case then if I
watch violent pornography when I meet my
partner at 15 16 18 21 I'm going to have
this expectation that pornography looks
certain I'm going to think sex has to be
performed in this way where I choke them
I hit them I but or whatever they
whatever because that's the only sexual
education I've had and I got it from
Twitter for example so that in that case
it will lead to sexual violence unwanted
SE not necessarily it will lead to that
uh it might lead to a curiosity of
trying it out because 42% of women said
that they have been uh felt they were
pressured or coerced into slapping
choking or being gagged yeah and I think
many women also feel coerced just to
have regular sex many times in their own
marriages what do you think Dr K so so
many thoughts and and agree that this is
a a very important discussion so like I
was kind of curious about this because
I've noticed there's this rise in like
asphixiation so the first question that
I asked is like why are people doing
this so what I found is there's once
again not randomized control trials that
we're going to take 100 people split
them into two groups and you're G to you
know and so the first thing is the
physiology is actually like fascinating
so the I know this is gonna sound random
we don't really know exactly what's
going on but so it's really interesting
because if you look at states of
meditation right so these are states of
like Bliss so something changes in our
brain when we're in a meditative State
now what the hell does that have to do
with asphixiation so one of the most
common trends of esoteric and deeply
spiritual meditation practices are a
very low respiratory rate right so one
practice that I did had a respiratory
rate of one breath every eight minutes
so that's like you know the regular
respiratory rate is 13 to 14 times a
minute so what we know is that when the
brain runs out of oxygen as long as we
don't damage it and that's the big
problem with this asfixiation is that
there's no consent there's no
preparation people feel coerced into it
what we know in meditation is that a
high CO2 level and a low O2 level cause
alterations in the brain that will
probably lead to something like a
psychedelic experience a blissful
experience things like that so when when
we're talking about asphixiation
something is going on in the brain where
we're altering the State of
Consciousness we're cutting off air flow
to the the brain it can be lethal it can
be damaging permanently damaging and
something can change in the brain that
will enhance the experience of sexuality
that is exper that that people have so
somewhere along the way people got into
this idea I think the other thing the
other B basic Trend that we're seeing is
that we're getting sexually
desensitized so if you look at um this
is not just sexual but like if you look
at you know pornography what tends to
happen happen is what I find arousing
will drift over time so I need to watch
more and more hardcore porn to get the
same level of arousal so there's also
something that show there there's uh you
know studies that show that If You're
vulnerable to an addiction you're also
vulnerable to risk-taking behavior so
when you take when you engage in Risk
what happens is like I don't know if
this kind of makes sense but you know I
I had a a a patient once who was working
in a jail and he was telling me about
when he commits a crime
and what he loved he has a really bad
ADHD and what he loves about committing
a crime is he is completely dialed in
because of the risk he has a survival
reason to pay attention to every single
detail he is so focused on the task and
we know that things like flow States
involve an intense amount of focus and
so when we're taking a risk it's
activating our dopamine way more we feel
when I've talked to patients who engage
in this kind of behavior they feel the
most alive because of the danger so
there's a lot of stuff that is being
activated if it's done in a healthy way
now there's all kinds of unhealthy stuff
going on um I think the statistics kind
of speak for themselves like my gut
check is that while everyone it doesn't
necessarily increase the risk for
everyone I think we're seeing the
intersectionality of a couple of things
so the first thing is that men are angry
so we have incels we have school
Shooters um you know men are resentful
towards women so I think part of the
reason we're seeing this violence
against women in the pornography is
because there's an angry incel who's
home alone who doesn't believe they're
ever going to have sex believes that
women are gatekeeping this and so the
the the masculine predatory systemic I'm
GNA teach this woman a lesson she
doesn't get to say no to me so these
kinds of feelings are being someone has
figured out on a tube site that if I
give men this fantasy they are going to
watch it more and more and this is what
we see punish [__] of women we see
punish [__] of women all the time I'm
going to destroy you I'm going to you
know banging and smashing and and but
you're saying that's a social problem
not a porn industry problem well so I
think what the porn industry is is doing
yeah the porn industry is figuring out
this is what all technology is doing the
machine learning is figuring out machine
learning is figuring it out so as you
cited some statistic about you know
sexual activity like more virin than
ever before more sexual frustration than
ever before more frustration with life
than ever before and so let's give you
this extreme thing that's chck Tech chck
checking a couple of different boxes but
interesting within this I heard
something which is you basically have
described softcore pornography as a
gateway drug to hardcore pornography
because the brain gets desensitized it
looks for a bigger kick like it was
heroin or something else you need a
bigger more extreme experience to get
the same high so if we start people on a
porn the broccoli they're eventually
going to get to the
cookie that's a great assumption I think
it's different because I think the
desensitization hap it's different
circuits of the brain there's a patience
to it there's an emotional component to
it so I don't think I I think you're
right that if we talk about squeezing
out dopamine could it be a gateway drug
absolutely but part of the reason that
in this moment I think it could be part
of the solution is is erotic is moving
away from dop erotic is not about the
orgasm the dopamine is the orgasm erotic
is about everything else except for the
organism so even when I'm working with
patients who have unhealthy
relationships with sexuality the point
is let's move away from orgasm let's
recognize that the sexual act and
speaking of the orgasm Gap if you're a
dude you can have sex and not have an
orgasm and it can still be a positive
experience and this kind of goes back to
the sexual violence what really scares
me is that as people watch this stuff
for whatever reason what's going to
happen is they're going to start to
think and I've seen this a lot recently
it's amazing how much this is spiked how
normalized this has become Oh I thought
women liked it this is what I'm supposed
to do right and then you feel coercion
from the side of women I think it's
interesting right I I wouldn't be
surprised if I wouldn't be surprised and
this is a bias in literature we ask do
you feel women as a woman do you feel
coerced into doing this I don't think we
ever ask men do you feel pressured into
doing this we don't even ask men what
they feel coerced in because there not
that many masculine scripts either of of
of having sex there's basically one
that's a great point and it's you know
the penetrative
sex machine that's the script we are why
is that that must be a reflection of the
demand well I think it's a reflection of
who's making the content and who's been
making even traditional media right like
movies where you see how people have
intimate acts even they're not showing
the act right it's always ma penis and
vagina within minutes the female orgasms
and that's it right that's the whole
thing that's not real life and it's been
made by men I think it's this two-way
dance really so I think there's there's
a certain demand that exists because of
whatever's going on in the world and
then we meet that Demand with
conversation which enhances sometimes
the demand for that content or subject
and it's this kind of two-way dance
where there's more content about it so
the demand increases and people get more
interested in it and all sees rise you
know yeah absolutely so I think that
that's exactly what's going on here
there's some preset demand but right now
the problem is that the only people who
are fulfilling that demand are making
you know highly processed calorically
densed you know orgasm masturbation
focused pornography and we even see this
in like other dimensions like if you
look at literature right now you know
the fantasy genre has so it has an an
inje
of female authors so fantasy has changed
completely in the last 10 or 15 years ya
has changed completely in the last 10 or
15 years I think maybe what we need is
dudes writing romance novels and
consumers they always have power
remember that people who are watching
porn they are part of this industry they
are voting with their attention their
time their clicks online hopefully with
their money because everybody should pay
for their porn because porn should not
be out out there for free for
anyone it's it's a people are working in
this they are you know they have lives
they have kids they have to pay their
rent the food on the table their schools
Etc we have to respect the work of those
people sorry I couldn't help the laugh I
just realized you said porn shouldn't be
free we live in a world where food is
not a human right water is not a human
right Healthcare is not a human right
but porn is free for everybody is porn
free because it it's behind a different
advertising it's just an advertising
model which means you are the you are
the product like so if you're consuming
advert you're basically paying with your
attention it's just a different currency
we're paying with there's no porn that's
free if you think about it fair enough
you I mean yeah yeah you're paying with
your attention either way you're looking
at an advert beforehand you're scrolling
past a display advert on the right hand
side of the page or even on Twitter if
you're on Twitter you're consuming ads
when you stumble across porn it's a
different advertising model but not the
right people are getting the
money the people making the content you
mean exactly
I mean it's the dealers who are getting
it when you look at only fans
interestingly 6.6 billion they made this
year and about five billion of that went
to the
creators and that's you know only fans
has been a real phenomenon in culture
last couple years I mean if we look at
the the porn industry so it changed a
lot I've been in this industry now for
20 years when I started you know there
was sites online pay sites tubes didn't
exist Etc and then uh when only fans
came around and when they become big in
the pandemic they changed again the
rules for this industry a bit and I do
think that it's better that the people
who are making it are receiving their
you know customers directly Etc and that
they can make decisions for themselves I
think it's a good part of the industry
that it works that way no fap a term I
um only came across a couple of weeks
ago this idea of noof FAP which is I
believe and you clearly know much more
about this than I do Dr K but um I
believe the term is it's it's proposing
a solution to the pornography challenge
that some people have where you
completely abstain from watching
pornography and or masturbating at all
um
Reena if I recall and I don't want to
mischaracterize your opinion here but I
think when we spoke the first time on
the podcast you made the case that
masturbation does have positive impacts
so what is your view on this idea of
noof FAP yeah so I think the the
movement it's so the idea of retaining
from or abstaining from masturbation or
watching pornography is a very
individual one and it may have benefits
for some people in terms of uh they may
because if they're using these things in
a negative way abstaining from them may
allow them to have more control over
other portions of their life but a lot
of people will misinform people and say
oh you're going to have a higher
testosterone you're going to have all
these physiologic changes which have not
been born out in the literature there's
like a very small study looking at men
who abstained from um ejaculation for 21
days that saw a very small minute
increase in testosterone like 10 guys so
it's not generalizable it's never been
repeated um and testosterone varies as
it is quite significantly over days and
throughout the day and you know one day
to the next so ultimately there's no
evidence to support report the fact that
abstaining from anything like
masturbation is actually going to have a
benefit more likely than not either
you're going to have a nocturnal
emission or you're going to body's going
to absorb that cement so it doesn't
really change what's going on
physiologically is there an impact on
fertility if I masturbate or don't
murate yes so fertility we do see that
if you abstain for about five days up to
five days you're going to see some
improvement in the seen qu um seen
volume potentially and also some
characteristics of of the sperm uh but
above and beyond that you start seeing
DNA damage and so that can actually be
negative if you abstain for too long so
the sperm are effectively dying in the
well you're seeing like mutation so
they're not as they're not as effective
they're they're not going to die
necessarily but they're not going to
create uh a healthy you know fetus or
embryo okay no F that is fascinating I
didn't know that's really interesting um
so a couple of things to understand so
there are a lot of tradition that
abstain from sexual activity I think um
we don't study those Traditions very
well and I think the key thing to
understand I personally think that um
celibacy and abstinence from sexual
activity can
be incredibly
powerful um and so I think part of the
we have to remember right so if we don't
have any evidence for something why do
so many people believe it so some of it
is there's a lot of bad information out
there but people what happens on the
noof fap community
is that people are having some
experiences and they're saying this kind
of thing changed my life and there's so
many layers to that so the first is that
I think nofap is kind of a way to
wrestle with any kind of Behavioral
control so if we look at like you know
people who are addicted to pornography
we talk about all of these negative
impacts of this cycle of I don't have
anything to do any day anything today so
I'm going to jerk off and then I have no
mean meaning no purpose no dopamine so
I'm just like stuck in the cycle so they
want to break the cycle and they just
pick one thing and I think just
challenging yourself from a self-control
perspective I completely agree with Dr
what mik says there may not be a
physiological thing going on here but
just challenging yourself and saying hey
like this one thing messes up my
relationships messes up my dopamine
messes up my purpose and my motivation
I'm going to take control of this and
it'll change my life so I think if you
look at it from an isolated stance of
masturbation it may not have much of an
effect we'll talk about the exception to
that rule in a second in the spiritual
Traditions but I think that a lot of
people are just using it as a vehicle to
come to terms with something challenging
in their life and they're like they're
making a commitment right I'm going to
do this thing and the benefit comes from
that maybe not any physiological
thing um you know all the stuff about
testosterone and stuff completely agree
I don't think that there's a clear thing
there but if you look at some of the
meditative Traditions one of the really
common things and this is really
fascinating because this is true of uh
meditative or religious Traditions all
over the world so you'll see cibus
is a part of some of the abrahamic
religions it's part of some of the
karmic religions from the East so human
beings at some point figured out that
abstaining from sexual activity can have
different kinds of impacts in the
organism so a couple of things that it
does is it reduces our thoughts of lust
um if we do it the right way and we'll
get to a couple of specific examples of
what the nofap community doesn't
understand so when I deprive myself of a
particular thing I sometimes reduce that
behavioral reinforcement so if I look at
someone who's addicted to alcohol you
know when they stop drinking alcohol at
the very beginning their desire will
increase but then 10 years later they
don't even think about it so if you are
someone who is thinking about sex
constantly and you stop engaging in
sexual perceptions so remember the
thoughts in our brain come from what we
perceive this is why advertising is a
thing because an Advertiser knows if I
can show you this thing you will think
about it now if I'm fapping and watching
pornography I'm getting this perceptual
um input which is then creating thoughts
in my head now I'm thinking about this
stuff instead of thinking about
something else so there's that layer of
thing too when I cut something off from
my perception when I break up with
someone why do I block them because if I
watch their social media if I get text
from them that's going to enter my
perception and control my thoughts so
they can also use it as a benefit of
like thought control if I stop looking
at this stuff this has also been
hijacked by generally speaking
patriarchal structures for like you know
there's a particular religious sect of
Hinduism where the priests are like I'm
never going to see a woman like no women
are allowed in the house if I'm going to
come visit your house right so this gets
turned into some weird things but so
noap gives us an opportunity for
self-control it gives us a chance to
reduce our sensory input which reduces
our thoughts and then there's also these
meditative Traditions which say that you
know achieving esoteric spiritual
experiences which is a lot of what the
noof fat community like talks about like
they become slightly different human
beings celibacy is a part of that now
the key thing about the meditative
Traditions is that they're not taking
advice from randos on the internet so
I'll give you all just one really simple
example when you do esoteric meditations
spirituality celibacy kind of stuff it's
usually accompanied in the Hindu
tradition or Buddhist tradition with
certain yogic postures and one example
of this is something called sidasa sidas
is adapts pose and literally what you do
is in this pose you place the heel of
one your right foot usually up against
your perenium so you put pressure on the
area between your anus and your scrotum
if you're a man it's a slightly
different location if you're a woman and
then what that actually does from
Anatomy I'm sure you know this better
than I correct me if I'm wrong is that
you know we know that the blood supply
to the scrotum passes through that right
it's on the underside it's like in that
pelvic floor region so one of the really
interesting things that I remember
learning from a yogi who was a medical
doctor is that when we compress blood
flow through the testes like if you have
gently compressed blood flow that
increases over time you're going to get
less blood flow to the testes you may
get some kind of reduction in
testosterone production in semen
production or whatever so there may be
some physiological things that people do
when they're normally like try to be
celibate that allow it to be healthy in
a in a good way so I think kind of the
the key takeaway don't disagree with
anything that Dr mik said I think you've
got to remember that nofap is not a
Surefire solution to fix all your
problems and at the same time some
people have positive experiences also Dr
mik has been emphasizing this point of
it's not the same for everybody and we
know that there are a couple of things
working with this community quite a bit
you know there are a couple of things
that happen about self-control
challenging yourself setting a goal
creating purpose in your life changing
what your sensory inputs are so you
you're not thirsty all day long and
thinking about being horny and all this
kind of stuff like sometimes you got to
kind of cut it out of your life and so
it's almost like this this uh cold
turkey kind of approach which which can
sometimes work for nicotine can
sometimes work for things like sex but I
think like your mileage may vary and we
don't really know exactly what's going
on yeah I think I'll add I think the the
problem I have with it to some degree is
when people are white knuckling it right
they're really and they're getting peer
pressured into it like you got to stop
right and so then they're they're
they're really trying hard not to
ejaculate and so they're tensing up
their pelvic muscles they're developing
problems because they're tensing up
their pelvic floors they're developing
dysfunctions they're getting pain with
ejaculation they're getting pain with
erections or they get so much shame when
they have a nocturnal emission for
example nocturnal emission is a
nighttime ejaculation exactly so they're
they're they're getting so shamed by the
community because they've failed which
is completely out of their physiological
control like you're going to have a
nocturnal emission if your body wants to
have one there's nothing you can do
about it so you know I think ultimately
there is a lot of Shame and peer
pressure that can sometimes create harm
in these situations now if you're using
it in the way Dr K describes like that's
fine if you're if you're deriving
benefit from it I have no problem but I
do take issue with the people who are
harming themselves because they're
getting a lot of pressure from the from
the group if I can jump in for a second
so I want to emphasize this point too so
this is really weird but people are
white knuckling it they're they may be
making their addiction actually worse so
there's a really interesting principle
in addiction where if I'm white
knuckling something like so like I let's
use the example of like opioid addiction
right so when when I have when I'm
working with an opioid addict at the
very beginning what they have is like a
psychological craving like I want to I
want to have an opiate so that I feel
better mentally I feel better I feel
Euphoria and then if I White Knuckle it
what happens is things start to get
worse then I start to go into withdrawal
and then my body is like now I'm going
into opioid withdrawal so instead of
euphoria now I start to feel pain all
over my body and as I feel pain all over
my body then finally what happens is I
crack
and then I use opioids and then
something really interesting happens the
body learns what it what it has to do to
you to make you use opioids again so
when you White Knuckle and actually
crack at the end what we find is that
you're the the body jumps straight to
level 10 right so it's kind of like we
see this also with like kids and devices
Mommy Daddy can I have an iPad no and
then they're like Mommy Daddy please no
ah and then they start crying then they
start thrwing a temper tantrum if you
give them the iPad when they throw a
temper tantrum that encourages them to
throw a temper tantrum and we see that
internally biologically physiologically
where if you resist an addiction and
then you cave at the end the body is
like hey there's no point messing around
with the early stages let's just go to
hard withdrawal way faster so I think it
can be so harmful when people are white
knuckling it they don't realize that
every time they fail sometimes what
they're actually doing is train in their
brain to punish them way harder so their
brain can get the dopamine that it
wants you talk about pornography being a
substitute for relationships in society
okay have you spoken about that I don't
want to misiz your opinion um I've got a
quote here but your experience is is has
been that pornography usage is really
just a powerful coping mechanism um and
it sort of scratches this evolutionary
itch for relationships yeah is it
therefore not a bad thing for people I'm
reflecting on that idea which we kind of
addressed at the start but also just
what I see in the comment section which
is people really seem to hate dating
apps and pornography but they also seem
to use them both and I just as a podcast
you we we were really surprised the
first time we had a dating app CE CEO on
the show because I thought oh great
episode we learned a lot about business
and how they built the app and then I
looked at the comment section and this
group of people had shown up with like P
like
pitchforks and they were expressing
their like desperation and they're
feeling that these dating apps and
pornography has very much ruined their
lives and so I just I'm throwing that
out there because it's a reflection of
the comments that I see yeah no so I I
didn't say okay to try to shut you I was
just like let's hear the rest so so yeah
I I think what was once again remember
that the brain every part of the brain
every neurotransmitter is involved in
sexuality and
relationships so what's happening is
when we this is the what we see is
that when we use technology to activate
the brain there are parts of the brain
that don't know the difference the
problem is that there are other parts of
the brain that don't get activated so
this is this is going to get a little
bit weird but so if I think about like
you know I'll give you let's just use
the example of food so when I feel
hungry I can eat something that's
calorically dense and that will satisfy
my Hunger but the calorically dense food
may not have nutrition it may not have
micronutrients it may not have fiber so
when I replace something nutritious with
something tricks my body into thinking
oh like now we're fine that can be very
damaging so one of the things that we
see with pornography is that if we look
at like you know being horny why are
human beings horny it's because if we
weren't horny we would never mate like
that's like it's a evolutionary it's not
a bug it's not a problem it's a drive to
help us succeed so then we have this
thing called post-nut Clarity right
which is like when we have post-nut
Clarity our our our horniness kind of
goes down and then then it changes the
way that we see the world so part of
what we see a lot with like pornography
as a substitute for relationships is
first of all we've evolve to have these
parts of the brain that get activated
right relationships are a healthy thing
for us and now we figured out how to
partially activate the brain through
pornography this is getting worse with
things like only fans because now we
develop a parasocial relationship
there's usually not parasocial
relationships with like you know adult
film actresses or maybe there are but
now we have interaction I've seen more
uh marriages ruined through only fans
than I have through pornography and I've
seen a big spike in this recently
because now it's not just a physical
thing there's enough insecurity and
physicality and problems in the bedroom
now there's an emotional relationship if
pornography online didn't exist would we
have better romantic relationships in
real life you've got an opinion haven't
you yeah we don't know short short
answer is we don't know but even shorter
answer is yeah things worse with
pornography and here's what I look at
right so like if we don't have rcts what
else can we look at rcts randomized
control trials you know what we can look
at is global Trends so what are we
seeing what's the global Trend in
pornography and what's the global Trend
in relationships now this isn't
causality there could be all there's all
kinds of I think one thing that I really
appreciated is um you know my my co-
guests have clearly showed how nuanced
and multifactorial this issue is but
generally speaking people are watching
way more porn and relationships are
getting worse we have declining birth
rates people are getting married later
um you know there's we're seeing a kind
of global like Zeitgeist problem between
men and women and por pornography is
like correlated with those two things so
in my mind if you H if if I say if you
have to if I have to put an answer if we
removed allll pornography from the world
would things get better I would say yes
but that's because the way pornography
is right now and I think is and let me
finish I think I'm going to tee you up
so I think it's it's it's because and
the reason removing it would be better
is because it has gotten more toxic
right so as pornography becomes more
harmful as it morphs and transforms into
something that is more damaging removing
it should make things better which is
inevitable because of how the brain
works you said we get increasingly dis
so we want more extreme so if you start
here you're eventually going to end up
here regardless I would say for who
would it be better or worse because for
me and my taste it would probably be
worse I think that people who are
searching ideas desires fantasies
scripts outside the kind of
heteronormative male dominant
pornography that's out there they have
really you know had a benefit of what
has happened during the last years on
the internet today they have access to
different Role Models they have access
to different stories they have access to
representation they you know have access
to sex education that is not
heteronormative and and you know kind
of you know in a heteronormative script
when it comes to sexual debut
Etc people always talk about that that
is through penetrative
sex that it's not necessarily true is it
what did we do before porn I mean were
we struggling in a in a bedroom before
pornography existed I mean I think
people were more open about sexuality
the the way the frigidness around
sexuality has is a modern concept right
like in in ancient civilizations you
were watching people have sex it was in
in live right like it was but it wasn't
easily accessible in 15 seconds and
extreme so we're saying we should come
off we
should we have to mature I think I think
we are in a maturing process that porn
online this way is still pretty new and
we haven't talked about it much in you
know General Society so I think that
this conversation that you are having
now that you invited us to have a new
conversation taking lots of time to talk
about different aspects that is exactly
what we need yeah I agree and I would
just say just back to your point I think
you know yes we see the rise of all
these things concurrently but if we got
rid of porn would there be something
else that people would be turning to
right like is it's is chicken or the egg
right it's probably not the cause it's
multifactorial and so would people then
turn to something else so would it be
only fans instead of porn right would it
be I mean an only fans can be a variety
of different things right but it's now a
live person that's communicating with
someone else or is it going to be AI
robots that have sex with you right like
are we going to turn to something else
gaming addiction or some other type of
addiction gambling or recreational drugs
or alcohol or so it's really you're
saying it's more just of a symptom of a
set of challenges in society that people
are using it for the emotional
regulation that you described Dr K I
think there's a little of both right
it's easily accessible it's it's free I
mean your time is time but like it is
not costing you money um so that is that
is part of the issue but I'm saying I
don't think it's I think that there is a
bigger problem and that people are using
as a scapegoat to avoid this problem
just to kind of CounterPoint to that I
don't think you'll disagree with what
I'm about to say so the other thing that
we know from addictions is that people
have drugs of choice right so to say
that it would be completely replaced I
would disagree with because I think that
the way that pornography affects your
brain uh is unique compared to video
games
um and at the same time we also see a
lot of stuff to support I agree with Dr
mik is that like we're seeing a rise in
video game addiction we're seeing a rise
in social media addiction we're seeing a
rise in pornography addiction and
depending on your individual makeup you
may be vulnerable to pornography versus
social media right so when you have when
you need that parasocial relationship
without the sexual sexual component
maybe you get addicted to social media
when you have that sexual component
Maybe get addicted to to pornography and
so I I think it is I do think it's like
a pretty unique thing so if we just look
at the physiology of sexuality in
relationships that's a pretty like it's
a dangerous dangerous thing to
to hijack because it's so like
fundamental to like life in mating so
you know I I think it I think it's
somewhat specific I I don't think it I
think if we removed it it would have
some effect but I I think what I'm
hearing from my co- guests is that you
know I think this is true of all
technology it's not that oh we should
ban it that's why I'm kind of reluctant
when you you ask that question and I'm
happy to say sure on balance I'll say
yes but I think the key thing to
understand is that we are developing
things as the human race without
realizing what we're building we are
developing so the problem with
pornography is almost like an issue of
like um you know when you introduce an
invasive species to a new environment
there are no checks and balances so I
think like there parts of Australia for
example example where like they
introduced rabbits and rabbits have like
just taken over the whole continent and
so I think what's happened with
pornography is we started letting people
arguably the wrong people start building
all of this pornography it's ripped
through our society it's changed the way
that now 40s something percent of women
are coerced into asphixiation in college
like what the [__] right like this is
insane like how did how did we get here
but it's only just the beginning you
mentioned there virtual reality AI these
new technologies
um one of the great things about these
new technologies specifically AI in
large language models is they can have a
conversation with you and this is
something in technology that we couldn't
really do before in such a remarkably
personalized way so you kind of combine
these Technologies you go okay I'll add
in virtual reality robotics is on the
rise as well we now have these large
language models that can communicate
with you in whatever way they need to to
make you feel whatever you need to feel
and I I look at that and go the future's
not bright as it relates to sex sex
relationships and pornography people you
know they did a study in 2020 with
virtual reality and they found the
researchers found in that study that
virtual reality porn um made people feel
more desired more flirted with and more
connected to the actress so the more
immersive we make pornography which is
the direction of travel in the world
generally the more it's going to be
addictive the more it's going to bit
feel like a better substitute than
having a real relationship with a real
person yeah I agree I think it's it's
unless we develop some checks and
balances and we
prioritize relationships with other
human beings uh as a society we're we're
going to be in trouble so what do we do
there do we ban
it do we ban virtual AI
porn because there's already websites
now there was three websites that I
found that allowed you to make your
own um partner um and they're calling
this Digi sexuals where you can pick
their personality you can pick their
physical preferences you can pick the
sexual fantasy that they perform and
that you want to see them perform um and
and uh and these are becoming
increasingly popular and the great thing
about these according to the websites
that make these sexual characters that
you can make yourself is it remembers
all of your previous conversations so
quote it can improve communication and
cater to what your desire is so it can
really speak to what you want but it
can't touch you oh it can't hug you it
can't kiss you
but the robots can those big sexual
robots can so like I know this is going
to sound crazy but like you know I I
think we we look at the end of the human
race and we look at things like climate
change and nuclear war and and maybe
like some super bug that is resistant to
all of our antibiotics like there's a
tiny tiny chance that what's going to
end the human race is something like
this and I know that's like kind of a
bold statement to make but like let me
just share with yall what I'm afraid of
so what's going on is you're right it's
becoming more immersive and the whole
whole problem with like technology and
even the virtual world what we see in
video games is that the immersive world
is one that we prefer to the real world
right so if you kind of think about
let's say only fans versus a real
relationship only fans like this person
is financially invested to not piss me
off whereas I know this is very
frustrating for a lot of dudes out there
turns out if you're in a real
relationship with a woman there's a
human being who has thoughts and
feelings and desires of her her own I
know it's tough right and and so like
what happens is we and only fans like
they're they're invested in making you
happy and now what we're happening is AI
girlfriends that's just the start of it
man like right now they they can try to
fulfill your desires someone's going to
figure out that a random reinforcement
schedule is better so if you want to
create the most addictive virtual
girlfriend she's actually not going to
give you what you want some of the time
she's going to piss you off she's going
to throw a temper tantrum that is going
to trick your brain into thinking this
is a real relationship which comes from
gambling psychology right gambling
psychology right and so now what I'm
going to do is get more addicted to
technology and this is why video games
are adictive there's a really
fascinating study where people were like
the the reason video games are addictive
is because of a denial of a reward so if
you look at fortnite fortnite is a game
that has a 100 players in Arena there's
one winner which means you lose 99% of
the time but oh boy if you're the winner
that one time the dopamine surge that
you get is astronomical when we deny
human beings rewards and then we give it
to them they're hooked this is gambling
this is also why we respect people
sitting at this table because we've all
worked hard what we did is not easy to
do that's why everyone values it
someone's going to figure this out with
AI girlfriends and then this is the
thing they can't hug us but they can so
this is happening so this technology was
actually developed in the early 2000s
for medical reasons so when we were
seeing um clinics in remote parts of the
world that would have these things
called haptic feedback gloves so this is
back uh when if you look at like a
doctor who was this was specifically a
technology developed around detecting
breast cancer so what happens is I put
on a glove I'm a doctor and someone else
puts on a glove somewhere else in the
world and then they do a breast exam so
they feel the breast okay and then based
on the lumps that you feel whatever
their glove feels I'm wearing a glove
that makes me feel the same things so we
have some of these sexually assistive
devices like you know for both men and
women now when we combine haptic
feedback and they start throwing temper
tantrums like I really think it could be
like there's this tiny chance it's just
the end of the human race cuz we're not
like why bother with another
human when I can get touch and I can get
activated and you can get irritated
every so often every so often which
makes it so much sweeter right makeup
sex is
great the end of the human race
scary I don't I don't want to go with
there I I think we have to actively work
at it right like we have to teach our
children that like relationships are
hard and worth it and you know like like
it has it's hard though it's it's really
hard but I think um yeah I think it's
it's going to be a challenge and we have
to have some checks and balances and we
on our own have to work in our own
little microcosm to try to continually
have the younger generation see the
value of relationships and procreation
and all those things because that's uh
you know on the decline don't people in
life typically just go for the path of
least resistance when left to their own
devices you know I was thinking as you
speaking about when I was in primary
school they came in and taught me about
your five a day so like you meant to
have like five fruit and vegetables a
day or whatever but then if they they
tell you that information but then they
put you in a food environment where um
every shop is selling me candy and you
know processed foods because it's it's
more nutritious my brain spikes more
there's no it doesn't matter if what you
told me it doesn't matter if I know
fight for fruit and vegetable but we
still have like this obesity crisis and
I think if you went up to the average
American and said what food is healthy I
think a good proportion of them would be
able to say what's healthy and what's
not but then if you ask them what they
consume it's a very different answer
irrespective of pricing because your
brain especially in a more stressed
world than ever before is really driving
driving you so I'm picking up the the
soda I'm picking up and I think about
the same in pornography we can know
something is not good for us but if it's
readily available and it's low friction
to access it the incentives are going to
win out over the long term and I think
about this in company culture I say to
people all the time I say you know as a
CEO you can stand there and tell your
group of people how you want the team to
behave but it's almost uh it's really
naive to assume over any long long
period of time that people will act
outside of their incentives so you can
say I want you guys to Al to innovate
but if your job description is literally
rewarding you to do your current job and
your bonuses are rewarding you to do
your current job you're going to do your
current job regardless of what the co is
barking you know at you I think about
the same in porn like we can't just we
can't just rely on telling people that
it's bad people do people do do things
for delayed gratification right we went
to medical school there is a lot of
delayed gratification in medical school
you're a CEO you're a producer like
these are not easy things to start right
and you do it because you know there's
potential reward at the end of it so
there is you know human psychology and
I'm sure Dr K can talk more about that
like where you can foster this
appreciation for delayed gratification
and also with good food you know when
you eat well when you eat green Etc you
feel much better and that gives your
energy and then you want to keep going
the stats just the Obesity stats are
just horrifying in the in the US in
particular it's a country where you know
education education education we tried
that you know in school I was told that
vegetables are good and this is good but
then obesity stats since the time I was
in school have just gone in One
Direction Still yeah that maybe it's
about the practice we have to learn you
know how to get into the right practice
of things and this is a question really
about is it the individual that has to
find this discipline or this this sort
of selfcontrol or at Social level do we
need to put things in place to make the
environment easier to operate in so
couple of thoughts the first so the
first is I think the answer to that
question which we learn in medical
school is there's never an either or the
answer is always both it's always
multifactorial so I think um I'm with
you that so like I when I think about
like you know what what is my life's
work it's I work on the individual level
so when you ask me should we ban
something it's like I I don't know cuz
my thought is that we got to save a
couple people the good news about the
human race dying out is that you know if
a couple people continue to have sex
with each other then all the people who
are vulnerable to AI relationships will
actually not procreate and Humanity will
survive right so maybe we're okay but I
I think that the other thing you have to
keep in mind so this is maybe a little
bit more of a spiritual event so I'm
with you that there's an obesity crisis
I'm with you that human beings it's kind
of like we treat human beings like the
lowest common denominator right we're
like oh human beings
if we give them broccoli and cookies
like they're going to eat cookies but I
think that there two things the first
thing is that like Dr Malik said you
know I think even if we look at this
podcast like the people who are watching
this are not interested in eating
cookies and there is an appetite why
have podcasts exploded because people
tried to educate kids in school and what
we have organically evolutionary
discovered is there is a different way
to communicate information that that
creates behavioral change that's the
first thing so we're seeing the
counterbalancing force of obesity like
the whole world became obese because we
had people making calorically dense food
without an awareness of it but I also
see the highest amount of like whole
grain advertisement that I've ever seen
before now we know it's a problem and
now humanity is fighting back the other
thing so this is what I think really
separates human beings from animals and
maybe this is an argument that a more
competent biologist will will say I'm
wrong here this is more of a spiritual
perspective but I think human beings are
the only species on the planet that may
be able to run against our programming
right and you can argue that this is
even a deeper level of programming but
like the whole point to Being Human the
cool thing about being human is my brain
can drive me like you said in One
Direction but I can say hey even though
my brain is driving me in this direction
I don't want to go in that direction
human beings are it's really interesting
right because we're the ones that like
so I remember you know watching this Tik
Tok or something about a vegan dog and
someone was like oh yeah you know my dog
is vegan they don't even like food Let's
do an experiment there's one piece of
meat and one piece of some weird corn
broccoli chowder right dog sniffs both
has never had meat for the last two
years and eats the meat so if we look at
animals like animals it's not clear to
me that animals are able to regulate
their impulses in the way that human
beings do why have human beings
dominated the planet it's because when
we feel like having a cookie we have
broccoli when we feel like yelling at
someone we restrain ourselves and there
may be some deeper biology evolutionary
kind of thing going on there but I I'd
ask each and every one of you to look at
your experience for a second forget
about biology when you have an
Impulse does that impulse control you or
can you fight back I fight right we all
fight that's The Human Experience The
Human Experience is fighting against our
impulses every [__] day and then we
try to learn how can I get better at
this because what my tongue wants I'm
talking about calories not sex for a
second you know what my tongue wants is
not there's a part of me that says this
is not good for me in the long run this
is delayed gratification how many of our
impulses do you actually think we're
winning the fight against because I
would argue that we're losing pretty
much all of the fights against our
impulses in fact the fact that we're all
sat here is probably us following our
impulses the rise in social media usage
is us being a slave to our impulses the
rise in obesity globally is US failing
losing the fight to our impulses the
rise in pornography is US losing our
fight to our impulses the rise in gaming
gambling alcohol whatever is US losing
our fight with our impulses yes
alcoholic people so this is going to
sound wild I think we're getting better
at it so I know you're saying we're
losing the war right human beings
self-control is increasing and the
reason why we're losing the war right
now but the enemy is coming up with
better and better weapons technology is
getting
sophisticated pornography is getting
sophisticated social media is getting
sophisticated and yet the human race in
some ways we're collapsing but we're
also like operating in some ways at the
best level that we ever have so we're
getting outgunned but I actually think
human beings on the whole what I see in
the community what's the top search how
do I quit pornography so there's
something happening like on a Humanity
level
where we're like as human beings we're
like we got to start fighting back this
podcast is is a consequence of that this
is human beings fighting back so are we
losing the war yeah but I think we've
been like we got caught by surprise we
got caught with our pants down right
which may be a weird analy in this
context but you know so so like I'm with
you that there's a lot of reasons to be
scared and also like the reason that
people pay attention to me and Dr Malik
and Erica is because we're fighting back
right that's why we're here Stephen this
is brilliant man because here you are
and what are you what are the questions
you're asking us we're all screwed we're
doomed isn't all screwed right so you've
become so sophisticated that everyone
who's listening to us you're pulling out
the strongest messages of hope that the
three of us can muster you're figuring
out how to give people hope because you
keep on asking these pessimistic
pessimistic pessimistic questions so
this is what it takes man it takes like
people who are like figuring out how
this works maybe you're controlling
their impulses who knows no no I have to
represent whatever the opposite of
whatever you say is if you say left I'll
say right yeah
right but so that's beautiful so think
about it when you were at school did
anyone ever tell you there's a conflict
between broccoli and cookies no they
said eat broccoli so we have figured out
as a human race that we need to
represent both sides of the conflict to
get the best out of a human being that's
a critical principle for addiction
treatment too you can't tell them it's
good you have to weigh the good and the
bad is there any such thing as too much
point Dr Reena so I think it's really
about how you feel about it so in all
the data about problematic porn use it's
like people who feel bad about it like
they're like oh I really don't I think I
use too much then you probably use too
much right but if you use it and you
don't feel bad about it and you're still
able to go to work and you're still able
to maintain your relationships and have
sex with your partner or Partners or
whatever then it's not a problem right
so I think it's really it's it's comes
down to how you feel about it and
usually you're right about it usually if
you feel like something's wrong and
you're using too much then probably
abstaining or trying a different
alternative may be beneficial so just to
conclude then if I made you Prime
Minister President of the United Kingdom
the world let's say and you had to put
legislation in place to make our
relationship with pornography healthier
or to make it a net more positive force
for society or impact on society what
exactly would you
do Dr Reena this is a tough question so
I think I would have some mandatory self
analysis of your porn use that everyone
has to take every so often so that
people can actually have to look at it
with an objective like not watching porn
but seeing like how many hours do you
use it and how often are using it and
again frequency is not always related to
problem but it is one marker that we can
measure and then you know maybe again
have a warning to them that this seems
like a lot of use are you still and then
they if they have a certain marker of
use maybe are you finding that you're
having difficulties in relationships and
whatever and and that would hopefully
alert some red flags to people who may
need some assistance and and hopefully
we'd have some sort of intervention for
them what about you Dr K uh honestly
what I do is resign like the first thing
I would do um but if you're asking for
like a single policy change I can get
behind one thing so I think the biggest
thing that we need right now from a
policy level is social and emotional
skills training for all children I think
we need to
reevaluate what we teach in schools and
what what people actually need to learn
today so school when knowledge and
information was not easily accessible
school was about learning information
but I don't need to learn the capital of
any state or country now because I can
look it up so I think what we really
need is social and emotional skills
training there are also studies that
show that this is very very helpful for
people so how do you regulate your
emotions how do you form connections
with other people these are the two
biggest things that we need because our
emotions when they get out of whack
they're the birth of all addiction and
media straightening so young people can
understand what they actually are
watching and that media is sending out
messages to the world and that we are
decoding those messages I think that is
absolutely necessary but what I would do
I I I think porn should be behind a
payment barrier for me
that's I believe that that's the way it
should be and better sexual education
better sexual education I would add that
I add that to the Mandate yeah
absolutely I don't know how to say this
you in a way that you're going to
understand but perfect Ted is banging
I'm an investor in the company I drink
it every day the whole team drinks
perfect Ted every day we have a perfect
Ted fridge in the office here's why I
like perfect Ted typical energy drinks
used to give me these crashes and as a
podcaster the last thing you want to do
is be crashing in a conversation the
founders of perfect Ted wanted to create
an energy drink that wouldn't create
that horrible crash cycle that many of
us go through so they used matcha as the
energy source and somehow they also made
it really really delicious they've just
come out with this new flavor called
juicy Peach and it is banging if you try
perfect teds juicy Peach and it's not
banging feel free to get in my DMs and
cuss me out you can pick it up at tesos
or waitr or you can get it online and
here's a secret that you've got to keep
to yourself I'm going to give you 40%
off perfect Ted just so you can try
juicy Peach yourself go to perfect.com
and at checkout put in the code diary 40
I'm going to leave that up for some time
not forever that's perfect ted.com and
then use codee diary 40 at checkout when
you try it make sure you tag me on
Instagram and and say Steve you were
right it's banging what's the most
important thing we should have talked
about but we didn't talk about as it
relates to the work that you do and what
you've seen as it relates to Sexual
Health relationships love and
dating um I think what we didn't spend
enough time on is how pornography
changes our body Images so I think
there's a significant number of people
men interested in increasing panal
length women interested in maybe
labioplasty or looking a certain way
that they're often seeing on pornography
and I think that creates a lot of
dissatisfaction a lot of Shame a lot of
um you know small penis anxiety is a
real thing and it's it it is very
detrimental people are so um so focused
on the size of their penis that they are
now thinking about it ruminating about
it um potentially doing harm to
themselves to try to increase Penal
and so I think that this is something we
didn't talk about but that is another
potential harm of seeing people who have
chosen to be pornography actors who have
you know on the high standard deviations
of size that's not normal right and so
they're not seeing normal anatomy and I
think that's that's potentially harmful
I I agree partly but then also I hear
many people when they're talking about
porn they're saying porn creates
unexpected kind of ideas of of your
bodies and Etc but I'm I'm a bit
suspicious about this because honestly
look at Fashion what is fashion doing I
think it's worse I really think it's
worse many time I I I in porn there are
so many different people today different
body types different ages
different you know different everything
that are being represented so I think
that that statement might be you know
from 10 years ago or something where
does that statement come from just I
mean we know that there is small pieing
we know that people are St concern my
highest viewed video is about increasing
panut length there's over 30 million
views so it is um clearly something that
people are searching now is it from
pornography 100% no not necessarily but
that's where they're seeing these very
large organs is typically on pornography
yes you can see a whole host of a
variety of different types of people but
I think they're seeing it there and
feeling probably when it comes to men
there are less Variety in porn than when
it comes to women Erica do you use large
penises in your work I don't know how to
say
that is part of your sort of do you
shoose them by the size no I do not I
look for I look for people's personality
that's what I'm after I'm I'm looking
for people who who feel like real people
I'm I I I mean Beauty and energy and
passion and chemistry these sort of
things but does the penis size matter no
to me it doesn't matter but then if
we're gonna be 100% honest it's true
that many of the performers have
slighter bigger penises than what is
considered average what's the average
penis length it's about 5.1 to 5.5 in
erect and uh is there a a gap in the
perception there do men think the
average penis length is bigger yeah
actually both genders do so when you
look at um studies where people like
look at a penis and estimate the size
both genders tend to um tend to
overestimate average penal length but
they also are not really great at
looking at a penis and telling the size
so sometimes they'll see like a five and
a half inch penis and think it's six
inches um you know up to an inch in
variability basically when you get on
the the above average sizes so there is
you know obviously perception issues but
ultimately I think the people who tend
to want to be and correct me if I'm
wrong um who want to be performers who
are male will generally have something
they want to show off and they will
think they have a larger penis what
about the length of sex though is there
disparities between how long we think
sex should be and how often we should
think we should be having it which
causes a lot of sort of dissatisfaction
in relationships yeah absolutely so
there's um the average time to
ejaculation for a man is about five five
to six minutes the average time to
orgasm for a woman during partnered
intercourse is about 14 minutes so
there's definitely a disparity there
that um needs to be addressed if you
want the if you have average duration in
your relationship then the part the
female partner needs to be prioritized
so she can reach Climax and that's not
the end all goal for everybody you can
still have a great relationship and have
a great experience without an orgasm but
if you want both people to climax you
need to stimulate the female partner a
little longer you're going to say
something that don't care yes I it's
just when she was saying you know that's
not the priority she look at
Eric so so there's just I'm sorry like
my brain grew up on the internet and
like there's like a subtrack that's
running this whole time but so I I think
you know what I what I teach my patients
is almost identical so if you look at
the average sexual intercourse like
people don't realize it's three to seven
minutes um is what's really even really
fascinating is that speaking of
misperceptions about 50% of
women start uh don't want sex longer
than 15 minutes so I didn't know what
the average time to female and male
orgasm was but I know what people prefer
and half of women like they don't want
you know if you watch like a a two film
or something like sure sometimes there's
shorts and stuff but there's also like
you know porno is like 45 minutes of all
kinds of stuff like it's like 3 to seven
minutes and women start complaining
after 50 seconds so I see a lot of this
um you know this like uh body dysmorphia
almost it's like getting to that level
in both men and women unrealistic
expectations about body unrealistic
expectations about performance that
creates shame once I feel feel shame
then I want to watch pornography then
you know I want to watch Dr Malik's
video that has 30 million views or get
pills to increase my penis size on the
advertisers you know so I I think that
there's just a lot of bad information
out there so does this mean that we need
to make pornography that is reflective
of reality i. make it 3 to five minutes
long for men and 14 minutes for women
but also um does it mean that we need to
introduce pornography that's reflective
of all body Images because again I go
back to this like broccoli cookie
analogy so I don't think it has to be
pornography so I had an interesting
experience so like I was in Europe and I
went to a coed SAA right so like we
don't have that here in the United
States and the coet was like mostly like
older people so you see like you know
the majority of people there were like
60 plus so you see like you know a
hundred naked bodies of like old men and
women and it really puts things in
perspective I think part of the problem
is with things like fashion and things
like pornography we don't you know we
just don't see what a normal naked body
looks like so what what's the only we
see two kinds of naked bodies we see our
own and then we see you know highly
produced or highly selected we don't see
normal naked but if I made a porn porn
film that had reality in it would
anybody buy it well I think if you made
a porn film explain
yeah that would sell out what are you
talking
about no but but but the answer the
answer here is yes I made a film with a
couple who are 70 plus and it's very
successful people there's a very popular
older female I don't know her but I've
seen her on social media who's a porn
porn actress and she's you know she's
normal looking quite many actually uh
but why don't the industry make videos
then of people with normal bodies and
normal sized penises but those videos
aren't the popular ones according to the
data not necessary if you go on any
streaming website and you click the
popular button what you'll see is
idyllic bodies now if people were
searching out the pornography you're
saying those would be the most popular
because the the companies would make
more money from them I mean there's so
much content I think that that really
lots of it is is is popular I I I mean
there's you know one of the things that
they are doing on this size on the sites
is that they are categorizing people by
their primary features kind of so you
can look for porn with bigger bodies for
example and it's quite a popular
category actually actually but you can
also look for tiny teens you can look
for mils you can look for for cougars
you I mean people many people they have
kind of gotten away from what is kind of
desire and connecting people and has
gotten into this way of kind of having
their favorite kind of people their
favorite kind would your business be
more or less successful if the bodies
were reflective of soci society and the
penises were reflective of society would
your business be more or less successful
in my case I don't I don't think so I
think we already show a great diversity
of people is it reflective of
society 100% not but who is is Netflix
reflective of society is Vogue magazine
reflective of society Etc I mean I think
that we do tend to look for beauty
somehow but beauty doesn't mean uh
stereotyped model liked
people yeah just to chime in so I I I I
I think I challenge your question just a
little bit because I think when you say
like I'm I get what you're saying but I
think we can also see the amateur porn
is on the rise yes and if we look at
when you say only fans made 6.6 billion
I think a big appeal in only fans is
that you have much more normal looking
people and so when when we look at the
success of a business or not I I think
there's also like a you know a varied
market so people are looking for
different things and I I think we're
seeing that there like even as porn
becomes highly overly produced and stuff
there's kind of this like almost
paradoxical upswing in amateur content
in things like only fans where you have
someone who really is closer to the girl
next door when we're talking about a
heteronormative sort of situation and
and I think we can also see that in in
we see that Trend all over the place
right so as we get short form content
we're also seeing an explosion in
podcasts so I think there's a variable
consumer there I was looking as you were
speaking at the top 10 earners on only
fans and I have to say none of them
look like they reflect the average
person yeah so the top 10 earners won't
top 20 no no no you can't look at the
top you have to look at what percentage
of the six billion comes from the top 10
earners and what percentage comes from
other people I right so so is only fans
of the kind of thing where it's like you
know the majority of the revenue is
earned by the top 10 earners or is it
this kind of thing where the top 10
earners get maybe uh 50% but then 50% is
like a pretty wide variety that's the
statistic you need to look at I can tell
you that what we do see is that people
search a lot on our sites for real sex
it's a a concept that people are really
looking for I also looked at PornHub
this is the first time I've gone on
PornHub at work just to see again that
that the the most viewed uh porn stars
on PornHub and it's the same reflection
none of them look like the average
person you know I'm looking at the
heterosexual so I'm looking at women and
men and they all look like
manakins all 30 of them well I think you
and your team need to do more
research you can't you can't accept an
answer his
values okay closing statements closing
thoughts we've talked about a lot today
so I want to go clockwise starting with
Dr Reena Malik um what are your closing
thoughts and statements to the wide
variety of people that would have
clicked on this video for the wide
variety of reasons whether they're
parents whether they're the young men
that struggle that you often spend your
time dealing with Dr K what are your
clothing closing thoughts for them but
also we have a lot of people that are in
government that listen and we only found
that out because sometimes they reach
out to us doctors reach out to us people
in Parliament um in Congress Etc reach
out to us so what would your statement
be to all of those people my closing
thoughts are invest in education about
your body and about sex so whether that
means learning what your Anatomy is and
learning what real sex is and I think
that is of Paramount importance to
having a successful relationship with
yourself and your partners that you can
enjoy sex and use pornography for
curiosity and not for
boredom yeah I I think um remember that
your body is learning all the time and
that we think about pornography and its
negative effect which it can have a
negative effect so I I'd start with
really understanding you know what
pornography is doing for you what's the
root of your relationship with it and
also recognize that
I mean it's I I really do think after
this conversation that pornography can
be a force for good and many of the
reasons that you may be watching it you
know if you transition to erotic film if
you use it to in a sexual relationship
like it doesn't have to be a bad thing
it's the way that you relate to it and
you know really think about how you can
utilize it in a healthier way and if you
are a consumer think about what you are
watching see if there's an about page
can you learn anything about that
company about these directors producers
performers can you watch them behind the
scene footage something that makes you
feel that you align with the values of
the people who are creating it because
not all porn is monolithic there's many
different kinds out there and there's
many great people working in this
industry to spread sex positivity
and a better acceptance of our desires
fantasies sexual lives uh who are
interested in the erotica the erotic
aspects of sexuality I I also think it's
worth saying you know we've talked
widely about the subject of pornography
um but one of the things that I really
did come to believe and I saw when there
was a call to ban only fans was that
only fans as a website and as a platform
is allowing
porn stars and you know adult actresses
and um actors to have a safer way to
make their money to do their business
and previously what you'd seen is there
was um much of the escorting industry
which was much more of a dangerous
industry have now move over towards
these platforms which do provide greater
safety for a behavior that is going to
happen irrespective of whether there's
um a ban in place or not we have a
closing tradition on this podcast as you
all know um you might not know this
um where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest and because
the last guest was you I'm going to I'm
going to skip past it and I opened up
the book to a question that's sort
landed before that so I'm going to ask
you all this question individually and
I'd love to hear your answers what can
you do to improve humanity and the life
of all the people that are
listening I think continue educating
people on and empowering people to to
know what they're bodies are doing and
how they can relate to the opposite sex
if they're heterosexual um in order to
have a satisfying sex life it's not just
an extracurricular activity it's
something that we do that's a part of
our innate biology and it's important
and
valuable yeah I mean I I think um
showing up tomorrow is like the most
important thing like not here but like
Ju Just you know if we think about
improving Humanity like human like you
know decisions are made by those who
show up so I think the most important
thing that I can do is just showing up
and continuing to do what I think is
best the most important thing that all
of us can do is just continue showing up
uh the majority of the people that I
work with in my community the biggest
problem they have is sometimes not
showing
up uh I would say connect with other
people on a deep
level uh dare to have difficult
conversations there to be wrong because
I also think that we live now in a
society where so many people are so
afraid of being wrong of saying
something wrong of that sometimes they
don't even dare to connect on a deeper
level with other people you your point
um Erica your answer about being okay to
be wrong I think is really really
important to a lot of the conversations
we've had today because most of the time
people don't want to have these
conversations because they're sort of
ideologically attached to a certain
position typically the position that's
associated with whatever their job is or
you know their incentive structure and I
think sometimes it's important to have
these open Nuance discussions like we've
had today because we can all start to
learn a little bit about other people's
worlds and bring down some of those sort
of ideological walls that keep us
imprisoned and all progress I think is
happens when you have this sort of com
this conflict of ideas but with the
purpose not of you know proving someone
is wrong or you're more intelligent or
whatever but through the purpose and the
lens of progress and that's why this
conversation has been so enlightening to
me because I get to see a bunch of
different worlds from a bunch of
different perspectives and I can use
that to form my own opinion on the
subject of pornography and I will start
by saying that my opinion of pornography
has actually changed in this
conversation because there was clearly
parts of my understanding of pornography
that were in the dark and those lights
have been turned on so now I have a more
contextual picture of the industry thank
you so much for your time today I really
really appreciate it it's um as I said a
second ago it's super inspiring and
super enlightening for me to get all of
these perspectives and to use all of
this new information to reform my own
opinion on the subject matter in a much
more naive sort of biased way so I
really appreciate the time that you've
all given us today and uh uh on behalf
of all my audience as well thank you so
much appreciate all of you thank
[Music]
Youk isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the D CEO at
the very end of it you'll know I asked
the guest to leave a question in the the
Diary of a CEO and what we've done is
we've turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com theyve sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
[Music]